Automated Acquisition of Proximal Femur
Morphological Characteristics
Slobodan Tabakovic, Milan Zeljkovic, Zoran Milojevic
Faculty of technical sciences, University of Novi Sad,
Trg Dositeja Obradovica 6, 21000, Novi Sad, Serbia,
Email: tabak@uns.ac.rs
The success of the hip arthroplasty surgery largely depends on the endoprosthesis adjustment to the patient's femur. This
implies that the position of the femoral bone in relation to the pelvis is preserved and that the endoprosthesis position ensures its
longevity. Dimensions and body shape of the hip joint endoprosthesis and its position after the surgery depend on a number of
geometrical parameters of the patient's femur. One of the most suitable methods for determination of these parameters involves
3D reconstruction of femur, based on diagnostic images, and subsequent determination of the required geometric parameters.
In this paper, software for automated determination of geometric parameters of the femur is presented. Detailed software
development procedure for the purpose of faster and more efficient design of the hip endoprosthesis that ensures patients’ specific
requirements is also offered.
Keywords: Automated acquisition, hip, morphological characteristics.
1. INTRODUCTION
EPLACEMENT SURGERY of the natural hip joint
with an artificial one (hip arthroplasty) is among the
most commonly used procedures in orthopedic surgery.
Conducted research indicates that over 800,000 procedures
of this type are performed around the world every year [1].
Basic endoprosthesis design requirements are prosthesis
longevity and as short as possible recovery period of the
patient. In recent times, primary total hip joint replacement
surgery (Total Hip Arthoplasty - THA) results in more than
90 % of endoprostheses being successfully used even after
10 years of their functionality [2, 3].
The success of hip arthroplasty depends on the following
factors: morphology of the affected limb, type and extent of
disease, type of surgery and endoprosthesis structure.
Prosthesis structure factors include level of adaptation of
prosthesis elements to the patient, and its mechanical
properties.
Planning of the hip replacement surgery for a particular
patient involves defining the influencing factors which can
be classified into two categories. The first group includes
factors that are defined on the basis of the patient’s medical
analysis (type and extent of disease, patient’s age and
surgery method choices). Keeping these factors in mind,
many different types of endoprostheses were developed in
recent years that are characterized by ISO 7206-1 standard
[4]. The second category includes dimensions that define the
prosthesis element geometry. The most important in this
group are dimensions and morphological features of the
patient’s pelvis and femur [5] and they are crucial for
prosthesis design [6]. Dimensions of individual elements of
the femur, as well as the shape and characteristics of its
geometry are determined by femur reconstruction based on
diagnostic images (CT, MRI) [7-9].
This paper presents software developed for the automated
determination of geometric parameters of the femur.
Software was developed on modular principles from two
parts (subsystems); one subsystem was used for extraction
of characteristic geometric parameters based on DICOM
images; the other subsystem was utilized to determine femur
parameters. Procedures that are used represent improved
methods of diagnostic images processing, as well as the
original design created from a detailed analysis of the hip
joint endoprosthesis design process according to the
patient’s requirements.
2. SUBJECT & METHODS
2.1. Reconstruction of femur geometry.
The main source of input information in the design of hip
endoprosthesis, considering bones morphology, are
tomographic images of the pelvic region [10, 11] resulting
from CT (Computer Tomography) and MRI (Magnetic
Resonance Imaging) methods. Reconstruction of bones’
external and internal geometry creates preconditions for:
sizing of prosthesis elements [1, 11], optimization of
elements of its geometry [10-12] and verification of the
designed prosthesis by using various engineering analysis
tools (e.g., finite element analysis [13, 14]).
In modern medical diagnostics, archiving of images is
performed by using DICOM (Digital Imaging and
Communication in Medicine) format records, covered by
ISO 12052 [15]. Processes of skeleton element
reconstruction based on DICOM files generally consist of
three stages:
• Image pre-processing,
• Femur contours extraction,
• Definition of bones’ geometric parameters [8].
Image pre-processing involves import and processing of
metadata (containing information about the object and
recording parameters) and upload of a series of planar
images from the DICOM file. In addition, correction of
contrast of individual images is performed [16] in order to
emphasize the elements of the skeletal system. For this
R
10.2478/msr-2014-0039
MEASUREMENT SCIENCE REVIEW, Volume 14, No. 5, 2014
286
purpose, distribution of pixel contrast method is used
(contrast for images can be from Imin to Imax) for the entire
range of depths (from Id0=0 to Idmax=2depth). This results in a
correction coefficient, k (in (1)), which is used to multiply
each pixel of the image.
max min
For determination of the image depth range and limits of
generated contrasts, information gathered from DICOM
images which were saved in the metadata file is used.
Fig.1. shows the procedure for correction of images based
on recording parameters and the desired contrast.
Fig.1. Image correction.
One of the main goals of this computer program is to
determine geometric parameters that are required for the
prosthesis design, which are most easily obtained by
mathematical analysis of individual image sections. Because
of this, femur contour extraction in this specific case is
based on the 2D segmentation of the bone tissue [17], by
filter application in order to detect edges, with subsequent
isolation of the area of interest (i.e., bone contours) and
noise correction that arise as a result of this procedure. In
the segmentation procedure, the LoG (Laplacian of
Gaussian) algorithm is used, which is based on edge
definition of the object, derived from the rate of change of
pixel contrast across the image. This algorithm is one of the
methods for determination of objects’ edges, based on the
Laplace algorithm that defines the zero value of second
derivative of pixel’s contrast intensity function I(x, y) on the
image (x and y determine position of pixels), and is defined
by (2).
Since the intensity contrast of raster images is represented
by discrete values for every pixel, image matrix is
multiplied by the corresponding convolution matrix. In
order to reduce the noise that this kind of image processing
generates, prior to Laplace algorithm application it is
necessary to perform reduction of transitions by using the
Gaussian filter described by equation (3).
The result of image processing is a series of contour lines
that describe objects in any particular image. After
segmentation, the object’s boundaries are expanded and
image contours closed by connecting the adjacent pixels. In
the final phase, extraction of areas of interest is performed
(in order to select external and internal geometry of the
bone) as well as the removal of any existing noise.
Fig.2. Image segmentation.
As a result of this image processing phase, a series of
images that include contours of the selected bone are
obtained.
Applicability of bone reconstruction procedure primarily
depends on recording method and parameters, noise
quantity, characteristics of the recording device and
reconstruction method. Depending on the method and
recording parameters, the accuracy of bone reconstruction
may be significantly under 1 mm [18, 19], which satisfies
practical needs in any prosthesis design. 
MEASUREMENT SCIENCE REVIEW, Volume 14, No. 5, 2014
287
2.2. Determination of geometric parameters of the femur.
The shape and dimensions of the hip endoprosthesis are
defined on the basis of the number of parameters of external
and internal geometry of the femur [11]. Regarding the
influence on the prosthesis shape, these parameters can be
categorized as global and local (Fig.3.).
Fig.3. Femur morphology parameters.
Global parameters (or reference parameters) present the
footprint for defining dimensions of the endoprosthesis and
its optimal position in the femur. This group of parameters
includes:
• Position of the medullary canal narrowing (A), isthmus,
which determines position of the prosthesis’ coordinate
system, its length etc.,
• Anatomical axis of the femur (axis a),
• Position of the femoral head center (point Ch),
• Femoral head diameter (Dh),
• Femoral neck axis (axis b)
• Distance between the axis and the femoral head center
(offset) (o)
• Angle of the femoral neck axis (β)
The above geometric parameters are used as sources for
preliminary definition of individual segments of the
endoprosthesis body, in form of coordinates (position
points), discrete algebraic values (length, diameter and
angle), and mathematical rules (axes).
Local parameters are formed on the basis of femoral
internal geometry and they portray the shape and
dimensions of the medullary canal in typical cross-sections.
These parameters present positions of corresponding points
in characteristic femoral cross-sections (position Pi
 in
Fig.3.).
Proper processing of diagnostic images and reconstruction
of femoral geometry in the form of spatial array (Cloud) of
geometric elements (usually points) makes it possible to
specify certain parameters (Fig.3.).
Fig.4. Cloud of points after femur reconstruction.
Local parameters are used to define the cross-sectional
shape of endoprosthesis. These parameters in combination
with the characteristic points of the external geometry allow
the formation of a CAD model of the femur, which is used
for verification of endoprosthesis shape and preoperative
planning.
2.2.1. Procedure for determination of femoral parameters.
As a part of this research, various methods of numerical
mathematics are applied to determine geometric parameters
of the femur from a cloud of points.
Medullary canal narrowing is determined by calculation
of minimum diameter of the circle inscribed in the
medullary canal profile, for all image layers. Since the
medullary canal cross-section is described by planar points,
the center position and parameters of an inscribed circle are
obtained by the least squares method. Optimal circle
parameters are determined by the minimum sum of squares
of the parameters applied to the planar circle equation (4)
for m points.
The minimum value of this sum is obtained by
determination of values r, xc
 and yc
, obtained by setting the
partial first derivative of equation (4) for all variables [20] to
zero. From the group of resulting circles, medullary canal
narrowing is considered to be a circle with the smallest
radius.
Femoral anatomical axis is obtained by using the same
mathematical methods on the line equation in space, which
defines the linear validity based on a set of n points which
are used to determine the position of the center of inscribed
circles in the medullary canal profile (obtained by
previously described procedure) (5).
Due to the femoral internal geometry, characteristics and
change of the femoral structure in the proximal part, images
of the femoral section from the narrowing to the position 20
mm below the lesser trochanter are used for defining
anatomical axes [10].
Center position and femoral head diameter are
determined by the least squares method applied to the sphere
equation, for a set of u points used to describe the femoral
head or a part of it (6).
In this case, the unknown r, xc
, yc
 and zc
 values are
calculated from a system of four equations that are obtained
by setting the first partial derivative of equation (6) for all
variables to zero.
In practice, some parts of the femoral head are often
reconstructed with an error that occurs due to the small
clearance between the femoral head and the pelvis, so the
least squares method gives the best results. 
MEASUREMENT SCIENCE REVIEW, Volume 14, No. 5, 2014
288
Femoral neck axis is determined by the cone that
approximates the set of points on the femoral neck. For
determination of femoral neck angle, femoral axis vector is
used (Fig.5.).
Fig.5. Determination of the femoral neck axis.
Based on any selected four points (A, B, C and D) on the
surface of the femoral neck, and coordinates of the femoral
head center Ch (which is part of the femoral neck axis), top
point of the cone (O) can be defined by using a system of
four non-linear equations. Equation (7) describes the
equation for point A.
Femoral axis vector is determined by coordinates of Ch
and O points (8).
The distance between the axis and the femoral head
center (offset) is determined by a well-known method for
determination of minimum distance (d) between the point
and the vector (of the femoral axis) (Fig.6.).
Fig.6. Determination of the distance between the femoral head
center and femoral axis.
The method is based on the cross product of femoral axis
vector ( o ) and the vector that extends between the
medullary canal narrowing point and the position of the
femoral head center ( a , known as the real femoral neck
axis [21]), and can be described by (9).
3. DEVELOPED SOFTWARE
3.1. The overall structure of developed software.
To achieve easier and more successful acquisition of
geometric information that is necessary for the
endoprosthesis design, specialized software that allows
partial automation of femoral parameter determination is
developed. The software is developed in MATLAB 2010,
using specially developed functions in order to automate the
procedure of femoral reconstruction and determine
morphological parameters. To facilitate any further
improvements, software structure is developed by using
modular principles and it consists of two subsystems and
multiple modules. Each developed module has a purpose to
realize individual tasks in the image processing procedure
and calculate femoral parameters.
In a global sense, the software was implemented by using
two subsystems: subsystem for import and diagnostic image
processing and subsystem for calculation of geometric
parameters of the femur. Fig.7. is showing a global model
of the developed software.
Fig.7. Model of the implemented software.
To additionally improve and partially test the results of
individual modules, software creates output data files from
each module. Output from subsystem that is used to
reconstruct femoral geometry is a 3D matrix which
describes the external and internal geometry of the femur.
The output files from the other subsystem are point clouds
matrix (adapted to communicate with commercial CAD
systems) in ASCII format, and femoral morphological
parameter matrix (which are specific to their positions and
mathematical laws that describe them). 
MEASUREMENT SCIENCE REVIEW, Volume 14, No. 5, 2014
289
3.2. Reconstruction of femoral geometry.
Input for the developed software is the subsystem for
diagnostic image processing, composed of modules
developed for the purpose of importing and processing of
DICOM images. This process is executed in three stages
that are implemented in different modules (Fig.8.). It is
therefore possible to easily verify and evaluate the
performance of individual image processing stages.
Fig.8. Processing and image reconstruction.
Image importing phase is implemented by converting each
image into an appropriate 3D matrix containing the
brightness intensity of each image pixel in order to form the
metadata matrix. Metadata matrix contains information
about: patient, recording parameters and characteristics of
each image.
As a result of segmentation in the image processing stage,
an array of binary images is obtained, where pixels contain
the value of 1 in places that are defined by segmentation as
object edges, and value of 0 for all other pixels. The whole
record is described by the 3D matrix, whose dimensions
correspond to the resolution of each image (usually
512x512) and to the number frames in the recording (i.e.,
recording layers). In addition, further processing of binary
images is performed in this stage by closing the object lines,
which is carried out by forming an object gradient mask.
Finally, in the last stage of image processing, a desired
contour is selected and objects that are caused by recording
noise near outer and inner contours are removed. These
objects are most frequently found in the proximal part of the
femur, in the region of the medullary canal end as well as in
the area of the femoral head. The phase of unwanted object
removal is done manually by defining a polygonal mask that
frames the object of interest.
As a result of image processing, a 3D matrix is obtained
which contains bone contours description in binary form.
This matrix is then forwarded for further processing.
3.3. Determination of femoral parameters.
Second part of the software is a subsystem that has a dual
role: the creation of femur models in such a format that is
suitable for processing in CAD software systems and
determination of prosthesis parameters. Femur models in
suitable format are realized by forming point clouds in
standard ASCII format. This creates a base for prosthesis
model analysis as a part of the femur to which it is fitted by
application of Finite Element Method software. More
important role of the subsystem, considering the design
process, is calculation of geometric parameters of femoral
external and internal geometry, which are very important for
the endoprosthesis design process. This segment is also
formed from a number of modules that are used to
determine:
• Position of the lesser trochanter
• Positions of centers and radii of the maximum inscribed
circle in the intersection of femoral medullary canal
• Positions of medullary canal narrowing (minimum
inscribed circle) and femoral axis equation of femur
internal geometry
• Positions of center and radius of the femoral head
• Femoral neck axis
• Femoral neck angle
• Distance from the femoral head center to the femoral
axis (offset)
Fig.9. shows the structure of the module for femur size
determination.
Fig.9. Determination of femur parameters.
Because of the complexity of the automated process for
defining position of the lesser trochanter and selection of
femoral head points, their determination is carried out with
the assistance of software users, while the other parameters
are determined automatically.
4. ACQUISITION RESULTS
Verification of applied methods and developed software
involves processing a number of diagnostic recordings and
analysis of attained data. 
MEASUREMENT SCIENCE REVIEW, Volume 14, No. 5, 2014
290
In order to verify the developed software, 12 femurs were
analyzed by processing DICOM images of patients of the
Clinical Center of Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia. The
recordings include 9 partial and 3 complete DICOM files.
Partial images were used for verification of femoral
reconstruction (to the extent of image coverage) and
determination of some parameters. Complete recordings
were used to define all other parameters. Fig.10. depicts the
method of software verification.
Fig.10. Software verification.
Table 1. Results of complete images analysis.
Image
Number of excess
pixels / total
number of pixels
Number of images with
incomplete contour
closures / total number
of images
CI-1 25/42549 (0.06%) 12/272 (4.4%)
CI-2 38/38810 (0.10%) 10/201 (4.97%)
CI-3 30/40342 (0.07%) 9/250 (3.6%)
First part of verification involves functional analysis of
subsystems for diagnostic image processing. It includes
result analysis regarding any appearance of excess pixels in
individual, processed images and incomplete contour
closures of bone section. Occurrence of these irregularities
in some parts of reconstructed femur may adversely affect
determination of geometric parameters, e.g., calculation of
the radius of the circle inscribed in the medullary canal.
Analysis of reconstructed femurs has shown that the partial
images, PI (which include the femoral body), had no
irregularities. On the other hand, analysis of complete
images, CI, showed that irregularities occur in the proximal
part (as a result of appearance of several elements of the
femur on the image, i.e., parts of greater trochanter and the
femoral head), while the femoral body contained no
irregularities. Table 1. presents results of complete image
analysis.
Second part of verification includes defining of processed
femoral morphological parameters. As Fig.10. shows, the
partial images are used to define femoral axis and medullary
canal narrowing, whilst complete images are used for
determination of parameters included in the software.
Table 2. presents parameters specified on femoral body, in
the coordinate system defined by the image.
Table 2. Medullary canal parameters of analyzed femurs.
Image
Position (x,y,z) and
narrowing diameter
MEASUREMENT SCIENCE REVIEW, Volume 14, No. 5, 2014
291
As can be seen from the tables, morphological parameters
whose determination results in functional dependency or coordinates cannot be compared with values obtained by other
methods, while scalar values can be compared with results
of measurements obtained using Able Software Corp 3D
Doctor v3.5. software. Table 4. presents comparative
parameter values obtained using these two softwares.
Table 4. Comparative parameter values.
Image CI-1 CI-2 CI-3
Femoral head
diameter
5. DISCUSSION / CONCLUSIONS
Procedures for diagnostic image processing, the method
for determining femoral morphological parameters as well
as developed software, can all be independently evaluated.
Evaluation criteria can be: accuracy, applicability in
research and/or practical application, and possibilities for
further development.
The applied technique of diagnostic image processing
includes a set of methods that are used in most scientific
research and commercial softwares for diagnostic image
processing [7, 22].
Approach to segmentation of bone images included an
analysis of a large number of methods, using both
theoretical and real results of specific CT images.
During the analysis of contour based methods in image
border areas of the pelvic region (as in the proximal part of
the femur, where the medullary canal ends), the LoG
method provided the best results. The results obtained by
using the LoG approach had the least unwanted pixels in the
contour, which is observed in other studies [23]. Application
of region based methods, mainly active contour methods,
revealed a problem in previous analyses with the positioning
of the initial mask and contour forming of the femur head
(which is a very small distance away from the pelvis), so it
is common that a formed contour includes a part of the
pelvic region. In many cases, level set method application
resulted in an inadequate formation of the bone contour
section in the proximal region of the medullary canal end.
This significantly complicates the determination of
geometrical characteristics of the femoral head. In many
cases, level set method application resulted in an inadequate
formation of the bone contour section in the proximal region
of the medullary canal end. Because of this, and based on
previously obtained results, the LoG approach of image
segmentation is implemented into software at this stage of
its development.
Automated processing of metadata from pre-processed
images, image correction according to the reconstruction of
bone tissue and automatic determination of morphological
characteristics of the femur, enables the femur
reconstruction process and data processing to be
implemented with speeds that correspond well with
commercial software for this purpose (20-30s)1
 [24]. Factor
that is somewhat slowing down image processing in the
current stage of software development presents the need for
manual definition of areas of importance to improve the
bone tissue separation on each image. Therefore, in case of
complex images (with more than 300 images in the
recording) this phase requires up to 25-30 min. of
preparation activities. Further software development should
include reduction of manual intervention and thus reduce the
analysis time.
Femoral reconstruction, which is implemented using the
developed software, is presenting the generally accepted
method that is based on a series of 2D contours. Results in
form of point clouds enable forming of files that can be
imported into commercial CAD / CAE / CAM software and
hence realization of endoprosthesis design. In addition,
resulting contours can be approximated by polynomial
curved lines and additional engineering parameters can be
determined, which include the cement layer thickness (in
cement prosthesis) and mathematical patterns (curved line)
of femoral axis propagation. These activities present a basis
for further research, as it is necessary to take the influence
of distance between images in the DICOM file into account.
The process of morphological parameter determination is
based on algebraic mathematical methods, applied on a
number of points that describe the femur. Applicability of
the procedure depends on the accuracy in determination of
certain parameters, as well as errors that arise by applying
methods for determination of shape from a set of points.
Table 4 presents an overview of the results obtained by the
developed software, compared to the measurement results
acquired from the 3D Doctor software. Critical analysis of
these results has to take into account that subjective error
often occurs by using commercial software, since
measurements are carried out manually. Its extent is
comparable to the size of errors of the presented method. In
addition, parameter accuracy can also present an issue: in
determination of femoral head center and diameter, where
the largest set of points, including unwanted pixels, is
utilized; in defining anatomical axes of the femur, circles
inscribed in the medullary canal and the definition of the
sphere which describes the femoral head. Table 5 presents
results of error analysis which occur due to the influence of
unwanted pixels on femoral head parameter accuracy, and
also includes average error deviation of defined femoral axis
from the position of the centers of circles inscribed in the
medullary canal.
From the error analysis results shown in Table 5., as well
as comparative analysis of parameter measurements using
 Analyses were carried out on a computer with the
following characteristics: CPU: i5 at 2.7 GHz, with 6 GB of
RAM; and a 64 bit version of the Matlab 2010 software
installed on it. 
MEASUREMENT SCIENCE REVIEW, Volume 14, No. 5, 2014
292
commercial and developed software, it can be concluded
that results are significant for endoprostheses design
requirements. This is particularly evident if the precision of
prosthesis surgery is taken into account. Incapability to
determine the anteversion angle (the angle between femoral
neck axis and coronal plane) can be considered as a
drawback of the developed method. This is caused by the
inability to determine the exact position of the coronal plane
without reconstruction of the entire femur and pelvic region.
Although method tests were carried out in order to indirectly
calculate the femur position relative to the pelvis, this
parameter was not determined at this stage of the research.
Table 5. Error analysis results.
Image CI-1 CI-2 CI-3
R spheres with
/without unwanted
points
Influence [%] 0.004 0.014 0.009
Mean femoral axis
deviation from the
position of circles
centers inscribed in
the medullary
canal [mm]
0.0043 0.0406 0.0341
The developed software, as a tool that combines image
processing methods and determination of femoral
parameters, is based on object-oriented principles. This
ensures its further partial development and analysis can be
easily done. Results are exported in an ASCII file that
contains reconstruction coordinates for CAD software, and
in a text file containing all the morphological parameters
determined by femoral analysis. The apparent disadvantages
include use of manual point choice method (Region of
Interest), which is used for selection of lesser trochanter and
femoral head points, in order to avoid accidental selection of
unwanted points that are occurring during the image
processing. This significantly slows down the process of
bone parameter determination.
The results obtained using the software for 12 diagnostic
images confirm the hypothesis that geometrical parameters
that are necessary for the design of total hip endoprosthesis
can be successfully determined by using adequate image
processing and analysis methods. From an engineering point
of view, obtained results are acceptably accurate. Most
importantly, the accuracy of obtained results does not
depend on the image processing method or the
morphological parameters determination method; it only
depends on the recording process and parameters that are
used during the recording phase. Analysis results are
obtained from CT images, which is a drawback of the
verification process. This is due to the insufficient number
of MRI images created with different recording protocols.
Attained results for several MRI images are encouraging,
but insufficient for software evaluation.
Methods of image processing, determination of femoral
geometrical parameters and created software, all present the
first phase of research that aims to explore the possibilities
for automatization of endoprosthesis design process in
accordance with patient measures. This will enable
significantly shorter time needed for development of custom
endoprostheses and reduce the associated costs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education,
Science and Technological Development of the Republic of
Serbia, project No. TR 35025
REFERENCES
[1] Pawlikowski, M., Skalski, K., Haraburda, M. (2003).
Process of hip joint prosthesis design including bone
remodeling phenomenon. Computers & Structures, 81
(8-11), 887-893.
[2] Ramos, A., Completo, A., Relvas, C., Simões, J.A.
(2012). Design process of a novel cemented hip
femoral stem concept. Materials & Design, 33, 313-
321.
[3] Garellick, G., Karrbolm, J., Rogmark, C., Herberts, P.
(2011). Annual Report 2010. Swedish Hip
Arthroplasty Register.
[4] International Organisation for Standardization. (2008).
Implants for surgery — Partial and total hip joint
prostheses - Part 1: Classification and designation of
dimensions. ISO 7206-1.
[5] Abadie, P., Lebel, B., Pineau, V., Burdin, G.,
Vielpeau, C. (2010). Cemented total Hip stem design
influence on adaptative cortical thickness and femoral
morphology. Orthopaedics & Traumatology: Surgery
& Research, 96 (2), 104-110.
[6] Tabakovic, S., Zeljkovic, M., Zivkovic, A. (2013).
General parametric model of the body of the total hip
endoprosthesis. Acta Polytechnica Hungarica, 13.
[7] Yuanzhi, C., Shengjun, Z., Yadong, W., Changyong,
G., Jing, B., Shinichi, T. (2013). Automatic
segmentation technique for acetabulum and femoral
head in CT images. Pattern Recognition, 46 (11),
2969-2984.
[8] Galibarov, P.E., Prendergast, P.J., Lennon, A.B.
(2010). A method to reconstruct patient-specific
proximal femur surface models from planar preoperative radiographs. Medical Engineering &
Physics, 32 (10), 1180-1188.
[9] Otomaru, I., Nakamoto, M., Kagiyama, Y., Takao, M.,
Sugano, N., Tomiyama, N., Tada, Y., Sato, Y. (2012).
Automated preoperative planning of femoral stem in
total hip arthroplasty from 3D CT data: Atlas-based
approach and comparative study. Medical Image
Analysis, 16 (2), 415-426.
[10] Rawal, B.R., Ribeiro, R., Malhotra, R., Bhatnagar, N.
(2012). Design and manufacturing of femoral stems
for the Indian population. Journal of Manufacturing
Processes, 14 (3), 216-223.
[11] Yongtae, J., Kuiwoon, C. (2010). Design of patientspecific hip implants based on the 3D geometry of the
human femur. Advances in Engineering Software, 41
(4), 537-547. 
MEASUREMENT SCIENCE REVIEW, Volume 14, No. 5, 2014
293
[12] Ruben, R., Fernandes, P., Folgado, J. (2012). On the
optimal shape of hip implants. Journal of
biomechanics, 45 (2), 239-246.
[13] Kayabasi, O., Ekici, B. (2011). The effects of static,
dynamic and fatigue behaviour on three-dimensional
shape optimization of Kayabaşi_Ekici type hip
prosthesis by finite element method and probabilistic
approach. Journal of Biomechanics, 44, 6.
[14] Sridhar, I., Adie, P.P., Ghista, D.N. (2010). Optimal
design of customised hip prosthesis using fiber
reinforced polymer composites. Materials & Design,
31 (6), 2767-2775.
[15] International Organisation for Standardization. (2011).
Health informatics -- Digital imaging and
communication in medicine (DICOM) including
workflow and data management. ISO 12052.
[16] Li, X. (2010). Semi-automatic segmentation of normal
female pelvic floor structures from magnetic
resonance images. Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
Cleveland State University, USA.
[17] Kale, E.H., Mumcuoglu, E.U., Hamcan, S. (2012).
Automatic segmentation of human facial tissue by
MRI–CT fusion: A feasibility study. Computer
Methods and Programs in Biomedicine, 108 (3), 1106-
1120.
[18] Gamage, P., Xie, S.Q., Delmas, P., Xu, W.L. (2011).
Diagnostic radiograph based 3D bone reconstruction
framework: Application to the femur. Computerized
Medical Imaging and Graphics, 35 (6), 427-437.
[19] Wang, J., Ye, M., Liu, Z., Wang, C. (2009). Precision
of cortical bone reconstruction based on 3D CT scans.
Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, 33 (3),
235-241.
[20] Hauser, J.R. (2009). Numerical Methods for Nonlinear
Engineering Models. Springer.
[21] Mahaisavariya, B., Sitthiseripratip, K., Tongdee, T.,
Bohez, E., Sloten, J.V., Oris, P. (2002). Morphological
study of the proximal femur: A new method of
geometrical assessment using 3-dimensional reverse
engineering. Medical Engineering & Physics, 24 (9),
617-622.
[22] Ababneh, S., Prescott, J., Gurcan, M. (2011).
Automatic graph-cut based segmentation of bones
from knee magnetic resonance images for
osteoarthritis research. Medical Image Analysis, 15
(4), 438-448.
[23] Muhit, A.A., Pickering, M.R., Scarvell, J.M., Ward,
T., Smith, P.N. (2013). Image-assisted non-invasive
and dynamic biomechanical analysis of human joints.
Physics in Medicine and Biology, 58, (13), 4679-4702.
[24] Van Cauter, S., De Beule, M., Han Haver, A.,
Verdonk, P., Verhegghe, B. (2012) Automated
extraction of the femoral anatomical axis for
determining the intramedullary rod parameters in total
knee arthroplasty. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Biomedical Engineering, 28, 158-169.
