Liver Fatty Acid-binding Protein Initiates Budding of
Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicles from Intestinal
Endoplasmic Reticulum*
Received for publication, November 20, 2006, and in revised form, April 19, 2007 Published, JBC Papers in Press, April 20, 2007, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M610765200
Indira Neeli‡
, Shadab A. Siddiqi§
, Shahzad Siddiqi§
, James Mahan¶
, William S. Lagakos
, Bert Binas**,
Tarun Gheyi‡‡1, Judith Storch2
, and Charles M. Mansbach II§¶3
From the ‡
Department of Molecular Sciences, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163,
the §
Division of Gastroenterology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163,
the 
Department of Nutritional Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901, the **Department of
Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843,
the ‡‡Department of Chemistry, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee 38152, and ¶
Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Memphis, Tennessee 38104
The rate-limiting step in the transit of absorbed dietary fat
across the enterocyte is the generation of the pre-chylomicron transport vesicle (PCTV) from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). This vesicle does not require coatomer-II (COPII)
proteins for budding from the ER membrane and contains
vesicle-associated membrane protein 7, found in intestinal
ER, which is a unique intracellular location for this SNARE
protein. We wished to identify the protein(s) responsible for
budding this vesicle from ER membranes in the absence of the
requirement for COPII proteins. We chromatographed rat
intestinal cytosol on Sephacryl S-100 and found that PCTV
budding activity appeared in the low molecular weight fractions. Additional chromatographic steps produced a single
major and several minor bands on SDS-PAGE. By tandem
mass spectroscopy, the bands contained both liver and intestinal fatty acid-binding proteins (L- and I-FABP) as well as
four other proteins. Recombinant proteins for each of the six
proteins identified were tested for PCTV budding activity; only
L-FABP and I-FABP (23% the activity of L-FABP) were active.
The vesicles generated by L-FABP were sealed, contained apolipoproteins B48 and AIV, were of the same size as PCTV on
Sepharose CL-6B, and by electron microscopy, excluded calnexin and calreticulin but did not fuse with cis-Golgi nor did
L-FABP generate COPII-dependent vesicles. Gene-disrupted
L-FABP mouse cytosol had 60% the activity of wild type mouse
cytosol. We conclude that L-FABP can select cargo for and bud
PCTV from intestinal ER membranes.
During intestinal lipolysis of a fat-containing meal, 2 mol of
fatty acid (FA)4 are produced for every mole of triacylglycerol
(TAG) hydrolyzed. These FA and the remaining sn-2-monoacylglycerol are absorbed across the enterocyte apical plasma
membrane. Absorption of the FA is thought to occur, at least in
part, via specific membrane proteins. FATP4, which is highly
expressed at the apical surface of the enterocyte, was shown to
increase FA uptake following overexpression, and antisense oligonucleotide knockdown of FATP4 expression reduced FA
uptake (1). FABPpm, which was first identified in jejunal
microvillus membranes, may also be involved in FA uptake, as
anti-FABPpm antibodies have been found to inhibit uptake
(2– 4). CD36 has been shown to be important for FA uptake
into muscle and adipose tissues (5, 6) and may also play a role in
intestinal FA transport (7).5 CD36 is also important for intestinal TAG synthesis and subsequent TAG export from the intestine (8). Kinetic experiments have shown that in addition to
protein-mediated transport, a diffusional mechanism for FA
uptake by the enterocyte exists as well (9).
Once inside the intestinal absorptive cell, the FA are largely
bound to intracellular fatty acid-binding proteins (FABP), and
the majority are rapidly converted into TAG (10) for subsequent export from the cell as the major component of intestinal
lipoproteins, chylomicrons, and very low density lipoproteins.
The absorptive enterocyte contains high levels of two members of the FABP family, the so-called liver FABP (L-FABP) (11),
which is expressed in both intestine and liver, and the intestinespecific FABP (I-FABP) (11). These proteins, first identified
over 30 years ago (12, 13), are abundantly expressed at 2– 4% of
enterocyte cytosolic protein levels (14). Although these related
proteins both bind FA, L-FABP binds 2 mol of long chain FA
and a variety of other lipids including sn-2-monoacylglycerol,
* This work was supported by NIDDK Grants DK38760, DK74565 (to C. M. M.),
and DK38389 (to J. S.) from the National Institutes of Health and by the
Office of Research and Development Medical Research Service, Department of Veteran Affairs research funds (to C. M. M.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges.
This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. 1 Present address: SGX Pharmaceuticals, San Diego, CA 92121.
2 To whom correspondence may be addressed: Dept. of Nutritional Science,
Rutgers University, Cook College, 96 Lipman Dr., New Brunswick, NJ 08901-
8525. Tel.: 732-932-1689; Fax: 732-932-3769; E-mail: storch@aesop.
rutgers.edu. 3 To whom correspondence may be addressed: Division of Gastroenterology,
the University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 920 Madison Ave., Ste.
240, Memphis, TN 38163. Tel.: 901-448-5813; Fax: 901-448-7091; E-mail:
cmansbach@utmem.edu.
4 The abbreviations used are: FA, fatty acid; TAG, triacylglycerol; PCTV, prechylomicron transport vesicle; COPII, coatomer-II; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; VAMP7, vesicle-associated membrane protein 7; L-FABP, liver fatty
acid-binding protein; I-FAPB, intestinal fatty acid-binding protein; VLDL,
very low density lipoprotein; WT, wild type; KO, knockout; r, recombinant;
DTT, dithiothreitol; BisTris, 2-[bis(2-hydroxyethyl)amino]-2-(hydroxymethyl)propane-1,3-diol; ATPS, adenosine 5-O-(thiotriphosphate); SNARE,
soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor. 5 F. Nassir and N. A. Abumrad, personal communication.
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOL. 282, NO. 25, pp. 17974 –17984, June 22, 2007
Printed in the U.S.A.
17974 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25•JUNE 22, 2007
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
lysophospholipids, and bile salts (15–17), whereas I-FABP
appears to be more specific, binding only 1 mol of long chain FA
(15). In addition to their distinct substrate specificities, there is
other evidence suggesting unique functions for each of these
proteins. Both FABPs can transfer long chain FA to phospholipid membranes; however, they appear to utilize distinct
mechanisms, I-FABP via collisional interactions with membranes, and L-FABP by aqueous diffusion (18). A role for
L-FABP in FA transport has been further suggested by fluorescence photobleaching studies, which indicated that the rate of
FA movement within the cell was directly proportional to the
level of FABP (19, 20). Interestingly, the phenotype of L-FABP
gene-disrupted mice was found to be minimally deviant from
wild type controls on a chow diet (4% fat); however, fasting
resulted in a reduced ability to generate TAG in the liver from
the increased FA present in the plasma under fasting conditions, as well as a decreased rate of hepatic fatty acid oxidation
(21). The decrease in liver FA oxidation was shown not to be
due to a reduced oxidative capacity (22), further suggesting an
involvement of L-FABP in intracellular FA transport. In addition to a potential role in intracellular FA trafficking, L-FABP
has been suggested to play a role in cell division (23), to serve as
a cytosolic reservoir for high levels of unesterified FA (18), and
to interact with nuclear hormone receptors, perhaps delivering
specific ligands (24). Finally, and of particular relevance to the
present studies, it has been reported recently that mice null for
L-FABP exhibit impaired intestinal TAG secretion (25).
The ER exit step is the rate-limiting step in the transit of TAG
across the intestinal absorptive cell, from its ER synthetic site to
its secretion across the basolateral membrane (26, 27). For this
reason, in previous work we focused our attention on the mechanism by which pre-chylomicrons exit the ER membrane and
fuse with the cis-Golgi, a process that is mediated by a sealed
vesicle, the pre-chylomicron transport vesicle (PCTV) (28–30).
In contrast to vesicles that transport proteins from ER to Golgi,
we found that the coat protein complex-II (COPII) proteins
were not necessary for budding of PCTV from the ER but were
required for eventual fusion of the formed vesicle with the cisGolgi (28). This study describes our efforts at identifying the
protein(s) that are responsible for budding PCTV. By analogy to
the COPII protein complex, we expected that separation of
cytosol by size exclusion chromatography would result in the
identification of a large molecular weight complex. However,
we found that the activity was in the portion of the eluate that
contains low molecular weight proteins. As detailed in this
study, we have identified L-FABP as a protein required for budding of PCTV.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
[
3
H]Oleic acid (9.2 Ci/mM), [14C]oleic acid (56 mCi/mM), and
[
3
H]leucine (180 Ci/mM) were obtained from PerkinElmer Life
Sciences. Immunoblot reagents were purchased from Bio-Rad.
Enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) reagents were procured
from Amersham Biosciences. Protease Inhibitor Mixture tablets were obtained from Roche Applied Science. Other biochemicals used were of analytical grade and purchased from
local companies. Sprague-Dawley rats, 150–200 g, were purchased from Harlan (Indianapolis, IN). L-FABP null mice (22)
were backcrossed to C57Bl6/J wild type mice six times prior to
use in the present experiments.
Antibodies—Rabbit antibodies to purified rat L-FABP and
I-FABP were generated by Affinity Bioreagents (Golden, CO)
and used at 1:30,000 and 1:20,000 dilution for immunoblotting,
respectively. Rabbit polyclonal anti-apolipoprotein B (apoB)
antibodies were a gift of Dr. Larry Swift (Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN). Rabbit polyclonal anti-apolipoprotein AIV
(apo-AIV) antibodies were a gift of Dr. Patrick Tso (University
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH). Antibodies to Sar1 and Sec31
have been described previously (28). Antibodies to protein
kinase C were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Goat
polyclonal antibodies to calnexin and calreticulin were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Goat anti-rabbit IgG,
and goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with horseradish peroxidase were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.
Recombinant Proteins—rI- and rL-FABP were generated in
Escherichia coli without tags and were isolated and delipidated
using biochemical techniques (31). Acyl Co-A-binding protein
was a generous gift of Dr. Ann Kier (TexasA&M University,
College Station, TX) and Dr. Jens Knudsen (University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark). Cyclophilin A and glutathione S-transferase were a generous gift of Dr. A. P. Naren
(University of Tennessee, Memphis), and profilin was purchased from Cytoskeleton (Cytoskeleton, Denver, CO).
Isolation of ER, Cytosol, Golgi, and Metabolic Labeling of
Enterocytes—Enterocytes from the proximal half of rat small
intestine were isolated and radiolabeled with [3
H]TAG essentially as described (32). In brief, enterocytes were stripped from
intestinal villi, collected, incubated with albumin-bound
[
3
H]oleate or [14C]oleate (as indicated) for 30 min at 35 °C, and
washed with albumin to remove excess [3
H]- or [14C]oleate. To
label newly synthesized proteins, [3
H]leucine was included in
the incubation medium in the absence of [3
H]oleate (28). The
cells were homogenized, and the ER was isolated using a
sucrose step gradient that was repeated to purify the ER. The
[
3
H]- or [14C]TAG-loaded ER preparation contained no Golgi,
endosomes, or lysosomes (30). cis-Golgi was isolated from nonradiolabeled rat enterocytes (32) as was cytosol (28). The cisGolgi preparation contained GOS28 but not calnexin nor
RAB11, indicating no significant ER or lysosomal contamination (28, 30). When lack of ATP activity was required, cytosol
was dialyzed twice against buffer A (25 mM Hepes, 125 mM KCl,
2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors, pH 7.2);
no ATP nor an ATP-regenerating system was added, and the
cytosol was supplemented with ATPS (2.5 mM) and EDTA
(2 mM).
In Vitro PCTV Formation—PCTV containing [3
H]TAG were
formed from [3
H]TAG-loaded intestinal ER (28). In brief, ER
was incubated at 35 °C for 30 min with cytosol, an ATP-regenerating system, and Mg2 in the absence of Golgi acceptor. As
indicated, when recombinant proteins were utilized, no cytosol
was included in the reaction. The incubation mixture was
resolved on a continuous sucrose gradient, and PCTV was isolated from the light portions of the gradient (30). PCTVs thus
formed were concentrated to 5.0 mg/ml protein using a Centricon-10 filter (Millipore Corp., Bedford, MA).
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
JUNE 22, 2007•VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 17975
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
In Vitro PCTV Fusion with the Golgi—When PCTV fusion
with the cis-Golgi was sought, 3
H-protein and [14C]TAGloaded PCTV (150 g of protein) (28), cis-Golgi membranes
(300 g of protein), and native cytosol (1 mg of protein) were
incubated for 30 min at 35 °C with an ATP-regenerating system, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.25 M sucrose, 30 mM Hepes, pH 7.2, 30 mM
KCl, 5 mM CaCl2, and 2 mM DTT with a total volume of 500 l
(30). The cis-Golgi were separated from unreacted PCTV by a
sucrose step gradient, and the Golgi TAG radioactivity was
determined.
Isolation of the PCTV-generating Active Fraction from
Cytosol—Preliminary studies showed that the active fraction
was cytosolic (data not shown). Purification of the active fraction commenced with rat intestinal cytosol, 80 mg of protein
(32), which was dialyzed overnight against buffer A at 4 °C. The
cytosol was concentrated 5-fold on an Amicon filter (YM-10
membrane) (Amicon, Beverly. MA) and further concentrated
on a Centricon filter (10-kDa cutoff) to 20 mg/ml protein. The
concentrated cytosol was passed over a heparin-agarose column (Sigma), previously equilibrated with 20 mM NaHPO4, 2
mM MgCl2
, 0.5 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors at pH 7.2.
The active fraction (data not shown) was eluted with the equilibration buffer, concentrated to 5 mg of protein/ml (Amicon
YM-10 membrane), dialyzed against BisTris buffer, 10 mM, pH
6.9, plus protease inhibitors, and loaded onto an anion
exchange column (5-ml Econo column; Bio-Rad). The column
was eluted with the equilibration buffer to which 0.1, 0.5, and
1.0 M NaCl in BisTris buffer were sequentially added. Each fraction was collected and evaluated for budding activity. The flowthrough had the maximum activity. It was concentrated and
dialyzed against buffer B (25 mM Hepes, 1 mM DTT, 5 mM
MgCl2, 50 mM KCl, pH 7.4 with protease inhibitors), loaded
onto a pre-packed Sephacryl S-100 column (total volume 320
ml, 26  60 cm (Pfizer, New York)), and eluted with buffer B.
0.5-ml fractions were collected and checked for activity (Fig.
1B). The active fractions were pooled, concentrated on an
YM-10 membrane to 5 mg/ml, dialyzed against buffer C (0.5
mM DTT, Tris-HCl, 20 mM, pH 8.0, and protease inhibitors),
and loaded onto an anion exchange column (5 ml) (Econo-pac;
Bio-Rad). The column was eluted with buffer C and buffer C to
which 0.1 M NaCl was added. The flow-through and 0.1 M NaCl
eluates were collected, and budding activity was determined.
The flow-through had 25–30 times the budding activity of
native cytosol (data not shown). The active fraction was concentrated on an Amicon YM-10 membrane to 5 mg/ml protein.
It had one major and several minor bands on SDS-PAGE (silver
stain). The components of the active fraction were analyzed by
tandem mass spectroscopy. 90% of the proteins were identified
as L-FABP.
Mass Spectroscopy—Prior to mass spectroscopy analysis, the
active fraction was separated into five fractions using reverse
phase-high pressure liquid chromatography on a C-4 column
(Thermo Separation Products, Thermo Electron Corp., Waltham, MA) to reduce the complexity of the protein sample and
remove salts and buffers. The fractions were freeze-lyophilized,
resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, and
digested with trypsin for 14 h at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides
were desalted by C-18 ZipTip (Millipore) using the manufacturer’s protocol. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was performed by injecting the tryptic fragments onto a capillary C-18
LC column (our manufacture, New Objective Pico Frit column,
360-m outer diameter, 75-m inner diameter, 15-m tip,
10.4-cm length, and Magic C18AQ packing material, 5-m
beads, 200-m pores) on line with a Finnigan LCQDECA
(ThermoQuest, San Jose, CA) ion trap mass analyzer equipped
with a nano-ESI source. The tryptic peptides were fractionated
using 0.1% formic acid in water as solvent A and 90% methanol
as solvent B. The sequence-specific data obtained were used in
the SEQUEST search engine against a nonredundant data base
(NCBInr) to identify proteins.
Collection of [3
H]Chylomicrons and VLDL—Chylomicrons
were obtained from rats infused intraduodenally with [3
H]glyceryltrioleate (10). In brief, chow fed rats were provided with a
duodenal cannula and a mesenteric lymph duct fistula, placed
in a restraining cage, and infused overnight with a glucose/
saline solution. The next day, the rats were infused with
[
3
H]glyceryltrioleate (2, 22.5, or 135 mol/h as indicated)
through the duodenal cannula. Hourly collections of the lymph
were made on ice and chylomicrons from 4 to 6 h of infusion
(steady state chylomicron output) collected by centrifugation
through saline (33). The chylomicrons were combined and used
for column chromatography. VLDL were isolated by serial centrifugations (34).
Chromatography of Chylomicrons, VLDL, and PCTV—Chylomicrons, VLDL, and PCTV were chromatographed at 4 °C on
a Sepharose CL-6B column (1  40 cm) using phosphate-buffered saline buffer, pH 7.4, as eluent.
SDS-PAGE and Immunoblots—Proteins, separated by SDSPAGE, were transblotted onto nitrocellulose membranes (BioRad) (28). After incubation with specific primary and then secondary antibodies, labeled proteins were detected by using ECL
reagents and exposing the developed blots to Biomax film
(Eastman Kodak Co.).
Measurement of TAG Radioactivity—TAG radioactivity was
determined by liquid scintillation (32), and mass was quantitated chemically after specific TAG extraction using organic
solvents (35).
Statistical Analysis—Comparisons between means were carried out using a statistical package supplied by GraphPad Software (Instat, GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego) using a twotailed t test.
RESULTS
In considering potential proteins associated with PCTV budding activity from intestinal ER, we first identified as a paradigm
the COPII protein complex (576 kDa), which is required for
protein vesicle budding. In line with this postulate, we thought
that passage of intestinal cytosol over a sizing column would
most efficiently lead to identification of the expected protein
complex. However, when 30 mg of native cytosol protein was
chromatographed on a Sephacryl S-100 column, the results
showed that most of the PCTV-generating activity appeared
just before the elution of cytochrome c (12 kDa) (Fig. 1A),
contrary to our expectations, indicating that either a small
molecular weight protein or a complex of very small proteins
provided PCTV budding activity. To improve the resolution of
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
17976 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25•JUNE 22, 2007
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
the column and to verify the results obtained in Fig. 1A, we
passed native cytosol over a heparin affinity column and next
over a DEAE column eluted with buffer, pH 6.9, with all the
activity being found in the flow-through of both columns (data
not shown). Fig. 1B shows the post-DEAE column flowthrough chromatographed on an S-100 sizing column. As indicated, budding activity was again found to emerge from the
column just before cytochrome c. Control experiments showed
that no significant budding occurred at 4 °C, in the absence of
ATP, or in the absence of cytosol (Fig. 1C).
The active fractions from the S-100 column were concentrated and the proteins separated by SDS-PAGE. A silver stain
of the transblotted proteins showed one major band at 14 kDa
and several minor bands (data not shown). Because a large
(8%) component of native intestinal cytosol is composed of
I- and L-FABP (14 kDa) and the active fraction contained
predominantly a small molecular weight protein, we immunoblotted the active fraction for both I- and L-FABP using monospecific antibodies. Both L- and I-FABP were immuno-identified in approximately equal amounts (data not shown).
However, when the concentrated active fractions from the
S-100 column were passed over a DEAE column and eluted
with phosphate-buffered saline, pH 8.0, the activity appeared in
the flow-through which, on immunoblot, identified L-FABP
but not I-FABP and on silver stain contained a major band at
14 kDa and several minor bands of slightly larger molecular
weight (data not shown). Tandem mass spectroscopy was performed on the active DEAE, pH 8, flow-through fraction, to
identify the protein(s) in the active fraction potentially accounting for the budding activity. The identified proteins were as
follows: L- and I-FABP, acyl-CoA-binding protein, glutathione
S-transferase, profilin A, and cyclophilin A. Recombinant proteins for each identified protein were obtained and used in an
assay that measures the ability of proteins to generate PCTV or
other TAG-containing structures from intestinal ER in the
absence of acceptor cis-Golgi (28). Of all six proteins tested,
L-FABP had the greatest activity, I-FABP had 23% the activity
of L-FABP, and the rest had negligible activity (Fig. 2). The
amount of budding activity displayed by 40 g of rL-FABP
approximated that of 1 mg of native cytosol protein (Fig. 2).
This level of L-FABP is comparable with that expected in 1 mg
of rat intestinal cytosolic protein (14).
To determine the relationship between intestinal ER budding activity and L-FABP, increasing amounts of L-FABP were
incubated with [3
H]TAG-loaded intestinal ER. The amount of
budding activity was proportional to the amount of L-FABP
added up to 150 g of L-FABP after which activity did not
increase (Fig. 3A). To confirm that these [3
H]TAG data in
response to L-FABP represented a true increase in chylomicron
output as the amount of L-FABP was increased, immunoblots
for apoB48 were performed on PCTV generated from each
amount of L-FABP added (Fig. 3B). The apoB48 signal
increased as the L-FABP increased up to 150 g and then plateaued in parallel with the [3
H]TAG data shown in Fig. 3A. The
finding that activity reaches a maximum suggests that the ability of L-FABP to generate TAG-containing structures from ER
membranes is limited and supports the thesis that the action of
L-FABP on intestinal ER is associated with a specific set of reacFIGURE 1. Fractionation of native cytosol (A) and post-heparin affinity and
DEAE column active fractions (B) on Sephacryl S-100. A, native cytosol (80 mg
of protein) was concentrated to 20 mg/ml protein and passed over a
Sephacryl S-100 column. 5-mlfractions were assayedfor protein and budding
activity. Molecular weight markers shown above the curves were cytochrome
c (12 kDa), Sar1 (25 kDa, identified by immunoblot), protein kinase C (76 kDa,
identified by immunoblot), Sec31 (150 kDa, identified by immunoblot), and
V0 (dextran blue). B, concentrated native cytosol was passed over a heparinagarose column. The active flow-through fraction was loaded onto an anion
exchange column eluted at pH 6.9 using a stepwise NaCl gradient (see under
“Experimental Procedures”). The active flow-through fraction was concentrated and passed over a Sephacryl S-100 column. 5-ml fractions were
assayed for protein and budding activity. C, PCTV budding activity under
various incubation conditions. Bar 1, PCTV budding activity (see “Experimental Procedures”) using native cytosol incubated at 35 °C; bar 2, native cytosol
incubated at 4 °C; bar 3, cytosol treated to be devoid of ATP activity; and bar 4,
incubation at 35 °C in the absence of cytosol. The percentage of ER [3
H]TAG
incorporated into PCTV under conditions favorable for budding activity is
12–15% (28).
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
JUNE 22, 2007•VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 17977
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
tions that enable budding to occur and is not the result of a
nonspecific interaction of L-FABP with the ER. This conclusion
is supported by the greatly reduced or virtually absent budding
activity of the other five recombinant proteins that were
assayed, each in the same amount as L-FABP, 40 g (Fig. 2).
The data thus far presented only suggest that L-FABP
releases [3
H]TAG from intestinal ER membranes. We sought
evidence that the released TAG was in enclosed, intact vesicles
of a size consistent with PCTV, i.e. large enough to contain
chylomicrons, and that the proposed vesicles contained the
apolipoproteins identified with chylomicrons, apoB48 and
apoAIV (28). Although the TAG-containing structures
appeared to be vesicles by electron microscopy (Fig. 4B) and
comparable in shape to vesicles generated using native cytosol
(Fig. 4A), their size was variable. In order to adequately compare the size of these structures to PCTV generated from native
cytosol, we chromatographed both over a Sepharose CL-6B sizing column (Fig. 5). PCTV generated using native cytosol (Fig.
5, NC-PCTV) eluted in a homogeneous peak in fractions 17–19,
whereas PCTV generated using L-FABP (Fig. 5, L-FABP-PCTV)
appeared in fractions 13–15 suggesting that they were modestly
larger. To compare the elution pattern of these vesicles to that
of rat lymph chylomicrons, we isolated chylomicrons from rats
(36) infused with glyceryltrioleate at either 135 or 22 mol/h.
Chylomicrons produced under both these conditions eluted
earlier in the chromatogram as a homogeneous peak near the
void volume of the column (Fig. 5, Chylomicrons). By contrast,
when the input rate of glyceryltrioleate into the rat was reduced
to 2 mol/h, the chylomicrons produced varied greatly in size
and appeared in fractions 2–20 (Fig. 5, Chylomicrons LD).
Importantly, this elution volume encompassed that of PCTV
generated from either native cytosol or L-FABP. The reduction
in apparent size of these chylomicrons as a result of the lower
TAG intraduodenal input rate is consistent with the data of
Hayashi et al. (37) who found that as the intraduodenal input
rate of lipid into rats was reduced, the size of the resulting chylomicrons was also reduced. Isolated rat VLDL, whose diameter
is 66 nm (38), were run over the column and eluted in two
peaks. The first and smaller peak was consistent with contaminating chylomicrons and eluted early in the chromatogram.
The majority of the radiolabeled TAG (66%) eluted much later
in fractions 40– 41. Thus the TAG-containing structures generated from ER membranes by either native cytosol or L-FABP
were significantly greater in size than 66 nm VLDL. One explanation for the reduced apparent size of these structures compared with the larger chylomicrons could be that the ER from
which they came could not be loaded with the same amount of
TAG as ER from rats infused intraduodenally with TAG
because the primary culture of enterocytes necessitates low
concentrations of FA compared with normal digestive conditions (39).
FIGURE 2. Budding activity of native cytosol and various pure recombinant proteins identified by tandem mass spectroscopy. The active fractions from Fig. 1B were passed over a DEAE column eluted at pH 8.0. The
proteins in the active flow-through fraction were identified by tandem mass
spectroscopy as being L-FABP (B), I-FABP (C), profilin A (D), glutathione
S-transferase (GST) (E), acyl CoA-binding protein (F), and cyclophilin A (G).
Recombinant proteins (40g) of each identified protein (except profilin A, 25
g) were assayed for budding activity and compared with the activity of
native cytosol (1 mg) (A). Proteins or cytosol were incubated with [3
H]TAGloaded intestinal ER (500 g of protein) plus an ATP-regenerating system for
30 min at 35 °C, and the PCTV was collected from the top of a centrifuged
sucrose density gradient. The disintegrations/min of [3
H]TAG of the PCTV
were determined.
FIGURE 3. PCTV budding activity of increasing amounts of recombinant
L-FABP. A, [
3
H]TAG-loaded intestinal ER (500 g of protein) was incubated
with the indicated amounts of L-FABP with an ATP-regenerating system for
30 min at 35 °C and PCTV separated by sucrose density centrifugation. The
PCTV-containing fraction was collected, and its disintegrations/min of
[
3
H]TAG was determined. B, immunoblots for apoB48 in PCTV budded from
intestinal ER by L-FABP. PCTV generated as in A were solubilized in 1% Triton
X-100 and immunoblotted for apoB48. The amount of L-FABP used is shown
below each of the bands.
FIGURE 4. Electron micrographs of a field of vesicles collected from the
PCTV fraction of a continuous sucrose gradient examined by the negative staining technique. Native cytosol, 1 mg of protein (A) or recombinant
L-FABP (40g) (B) was incubated with [3
H]TAG-loaded intestinal ERfor 30 min
at 35 °C, and the PCTV fraction was obtained by continuous sucrose density
fractionation. One drop was placed on a Formvar-carbon-coated nickel grid,
washed with distilled water, stained with 2% uranyl acetate, air-dried, and
examined by electron microscopy. Each bar represents 500 nm.
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
17978 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25•JUNE 22, 2007
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
We sought additional evidence that the structures generated
by rL-FABP were compatible with PCTV. Characteristically,
transport vesicles concentrate cargo and exclude nonspecific
proteins; specifically PCTV concentrate apoB48 and apoAIV by
comparison to intestinal ER and exclude the ER proteins calnexin and calreticulin (28). These characteristics are consistent
with the TAG-containing structures generated by L-FABP,
which also concentrate apoB48 and apoAIV and exclude calnexin and calreticulin (Fig. 6). Another characteristic of transport vesicles is that they are sealed as evidenced by their cargo
resisting external protease digestion. Proteinase K treatment of
the TAG-rich structures budded from ER membranes by
L-FABP demonstrated an absence of protein degradation, consistent with this criterion (Fig. 7). As shown, the cargo protein,
apoB48, resisted Proteinase K digestion both in PCTV formed
in native cytosol and the TAG-rich structures formed by
L-FABP. By contrast, if Triton X-100 disrupted the vesicle
membranes, then in both cases the apoB48 signal was extinguished (Fig. 7). In sum, the data presented thus far show that
the structures generated by L-FABP produce a sealed vesicle
containing TAG, concentrate the chylomicron-associated apolipoproteins B48 and AIV, exclude ER luminal proteins, and are
of a size similar to PCTV. In toto, these data are consistent with
the thesis that the TAG-rich vesicle produced by rL-FABP is
comparable with the PCTV produced by native cytosol.
To further examine the involvement of L-FABP in PCTV
budding from ER, we evaluated cytosol from the intestine of
L-FABP null mice, compared with cytosol from wild type mice
of the same genetic background. Using [3
H]TAG-loaded rat ER,
preliminary studies showed that C57Bl6/J mouse cytosol was
active in budding PCTV from rat ER albeit at an 40% reduced
rate compared with native rat cytosol (data not shown).
Cytosols from L-FABP/ and L-FABP/ mice were tested
for budding activity from rat ER pre-loaded with [3
H]TAG. The
budding activity of L-FABP/ mice was significantly (40%)
reduced compared with wild type mice (Fig. 8). The residual
activity in the gene-disrupted mice may be due in part to
I-FABP, which has some budding activity (Fig. 2), or perhaps
other compensatory mechanisms. Although I-FABP expression in intestine is not increased in L-FABP/ mice (data not
shown), large amounts of I-FABP are present in intestinal
cytosol (14). At present, we do not know if the observed
decrease in TG output in PCTV from LFABP-KO cytosol is
FIGURE 5. PCTV generated by recombinant L-FABP from intestinal ER are
of the same size as chylomicrons from the mesenteric lymph of rats
infused intraduodenally with a low dose of TAG. Chylomicrons were collected from the mesenteric lymph duct of rats intraduodenally infused with
either 135 mol or 27.5 mol/h trioleoylglycerol (chylomicrons at both infusion levels gave identical curves) or 2 mol/h trioleoylglycerol (Chylomicrons
Low Dose). VLDL was collected from the mesenteric lymph duct of rats
intraduodenally infused with 135 mol/[3
H]trioleoylglycerol (VLDL). PCTV
were collected from a continuous sucrose gradient after incubating native
cytosol (1 mg of protein) (NC-PCTV) or recombinant L-FABP (40 g) (L-FABPPCTV) with [3
H]TAG-loaded intestinal ER (500 g) and an ATP-regenerating
system for 30 min at 35 °C. The chylomicrons, VLDL, or PCTV were sized by
passing them over a Sepharose CL-6B column. The PCTV, VLDL, or chylomicron [3
H]TAG was extracted, and its disintegrations/min were determined.
FIGURE 6. PCTV generated from intestinal ER using recombinant L-FABP
concentrate the expected chylomicron apolipoproteins and exclude
luminal and transmembrane ER resident proteins. Immunoblots for the
indicated proteins of PCTV generated from rL-FABP or native cytosol, ER, and
Golgi. The proteins (40 g) of the various fractions were separated by SDSPAGE, and the proteins were transblotted to a nitrocellulose membrane and
probed with antibodies to apoB-48, apoA-IV, calreticulin, or calnexin. The
bands were identified by ECL.
FIGURE 7. PCTV generated from intestinal ER membranes using recombinant L-FABP are sealed as indicated by immunoblots of apoB-48 in PCTV
before or after treatment with proteinase K. PCTV were isolated from a
continuous sucrose gradient after the incubation of [3
H]TAG-loaded intestinal ER that had been incubated with either native cytosol (lanes 2–4) (500 g
of protein) or recombinant L-FABP (lanes 6 –8) (40 g) and an ATP-regenerating system for 30 min at 35 °C. Lane 1, molecular weight markers. Lane 2, PCTV
from native cytosol. Lane 3, PCTV from native cytosol treated with proteinase
K. Lane 4, PCTVfrom native cytosol treated with Triton X-100 and proteinase K.
Lane 5, blank. Lane 6, PCTV from L-FABP. Lane 7, PCTV from L-FABP treated
with proteinase K. Lane 8, PCTV from L-FABP treated with Triton X-100 and
proteinase K. The PCTV proteins (40 g of protein) from each treatment were
separated by SDS-PAGE, transblotted to a nitrocellulose membrane, and
probed with anti-apoB-48 antibodies. Detection was by ECL.
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
JUNE 22, 2007•VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 17979
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
because of a decrease in the size of the PCTV or a decrease in
the number of PCTV generated. Current studies are addressing
this question. Budding activity of the L-FABP null mice was
entirely restored when 40 g of r-LFABP was added (Fig. 8).
Furthermore, when L-FABP was added to wild type mouse
cytosol, a significant (20%) increase in budding activity was also
found.
Although L-FABP, as shown, can bud vesicles that contain
chylomicrons, we considered the possibility that it might also
participate in budding vesicles that contain newly synthesized
proteins from intestinal ER. This potential has been given
recent support in yeast, where it was shown that an unknown
small molecular weight protein is required for ER budding
activity to be fully expressed (40). However, as shown in Fig. 9,
we found that L-FABP did not produce vesicles carrying newly
synthesized protein from the ER, in contrast to its robust ability
to bud TAG-carrying vesicles.
Because L-FABP can select cargo and bud chylomicron-containing vesicles from intestinal ER membranes, we next asked if
L-FABP-budded vesicles were functionally capable of fusing
with intestinal cis-Golgi (30). [3
H]TAG-loaded PCTV generated from native cytosol were incubated with intestinal cisGolgi, ATP, and Mg2 at 35 °C for 30 min. As expected, the
results showed (30) that considerable disintegrations/min of
[
3
H]TAG became isodense with Golgi postincubation (Fig. 10,
Native cytosol). In marked contrast, L-FABP generated PCTV,
similarly incubated with cis-Golgi, ATP, and Mg2, either with
or without native cytosol, did not result in [3
H]TAG delivery to
the Golgi (Fig. 10, rL-FABP, rL-FABP  Cytosol). These results
indicate that L-FABP-generated PCTV cannot fuse with Golgi
membranes. One possibility for the absence of Golgi fusion for
the L-FABP  cytosol condition could be the lack of the COPII
proteins on PCTV that are required for fusion of PCTV with the
Golgi (28), a potential we tested in the next series of
experiments.
Because we previously found that vesicles generated from
intestinal ER using cytosol depleted of Sar1 were also incapable
of fusing with Golgi (28), we hypothesized that the L-FABPgenerated vesicles, which were formed in a cytosol-free
medium, would likely contain low levels of the cytosolic COPII
protein, Sar1, on their surface. Indeed, in contrast to PCTV
generated in native cytosol (28), Sar1 immunoblotting demonstrated no detectable Sar1 in L-FABP-generated PCTV incubated without cytosol (Fig. 11, rL-FABP-Buffer) despite the
presence of Sar1 on intestinal ER membranes (Fig. 11, ER) (28,
30). Interestingly, even when the rL-FABP-generated PCTV
were subsequently incubated with native cytosol, no Sar1 loading occurred (Fig. 11, L-FABP-Cytosol) despite the presence of
Sar1 in native cytosol (Fig. 11, Cytosol). This is the expected
result because Sar1 vesicle loading requires the GDP-GTP
exchange protein, Sec12, located on the ER membrane.
It is possible that L-FABP or a binding partner needs to be
present at the inception of PCTV for PCTV fusion with the
Golgi to occur because L-FABP is present on PCTV (data not
FIGURE 8. The cytosol from L-FABP gene-disrupted mice has a reduced
ability to generate PCTV from intestinal ER membranes that is restored
by the addition of recombinant L-FABP. [
3
H]TAG-loaded rat intestinal ER
(500 g of protein) were incubated with intestinal cytosol (1 mg of protein)
from WT mice (WT) or L-FABP gene-disrupted mice (KO) and an ATP-generating system for 30 min at 35 °C. After incubation, PCTV were collected from a
continuous sucrose gradient; the [3
H]TAG was extracted, and the disintegrations/min of 3
H determined with the PCTV from the WT mice equal to 100%.
Cytosol from KO (KO  rP) and WT (WT  rP) mice was supplemented with 40
g of recombinant L-FABP, and the 3
H disintegrations/min determined with
PCTV-[3
H]TAG disintegrations/min similarly determined. p values indicating
significant differences between the activity of KO cytosol and WT cytosol are
indicated above the KO bar. Significant differences between KO cytosol and
the KO  rL-FABP (KO  rP) and WT  rL-FABP (WT  rP) bars are indicated
above the KOrP and WTrP bars.
FIGURE 9. Recombinant L-FABP generates PCTV but not vesicles that contain newly synthesized protein. [
3
H]Leucine-labeled newly synthesized
protein and [14C]TAG-loaded intestinal ER (500g of protein) were incubated
with either cytosol (1 mg of protein) (Cytosol) or 40g of recombinant L-FABP
and an ATP-regenerating system for 30 min at 35 °C. The PCTV were isolated
from a continuous sucrose gradient, and its 3
H-protein was precipitated using
trichloroacetic acid (left ordinate) and its [14C]TAG extracted (right ordinate).
The vesicle 3
H and 14C disintegrations/min were determined.
FIGURE 10.Recombinant L-FABP-generated PCTV does not deliver TAG to
the cis-Golgi. PCTV from [3
H]TAG-loaded intestinal ER (500 g of protein)
incubated with either native cytosol (Native cytosol) (1 mg of protein), recombinant L-FABP (40 g) (rL-FABP), or recombinant L-FABP generated PCTV and
the PCTV subsequently incubated (30 min at 35 °C) with native cytosol (1 mg
of protein) and an ATP-regenerating system (rL-FABPcytosol) were incubated for 30 min at 35 °C with intestinal cis-Golgi (300 g of protein) and the
Golgi separated by a discontinuous sucrose gradient. The Golgi [3
H]TAG disintegrations/min were determined. The fusion efficiency of PCTV generated
in native cytosol with cis-Golgi membranes is 25% (28).
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
17980 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25•JUNE 22, 2007
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
shown). We could not answer this question directly by using
PCTV produced using cytosol from L-FABP KO mice because
of the reduced amount of PCTV produced by these mice and
the amount of protein required for our assays. To approximate
these conditions, however, we generated PCTV using native
cytosol, isolated the PCTV, and then washed them free of
L-FABP (as judged by immunoblot, data not shown) and possible attached proteins using 2 M KCl. These washed PCTV were
then incubated with L-FABP KO cytosol and Golgi in our
fusion assay (“Experimental Procedures”). The results were
compared with similarly washed PCTV but incubated with
native cytosol and Golgi. When the PCTV were allowed to fuse
with the Golgi using L-FABP KO cytosol, 986  104 [3
H] TAG
dpm were delivered to the Golgi as compared with 1044  117
[
3
H] TAG dpm when the washed PCTV were incubated with
native cytosol and Golgi (p  0.05, n  4). These data suggest
that L-FABP or a binding partner do not have to be present on
PCTV for fusion with the Golgi to occur.
Because L-FABP-generated vesicles do not fuse with the cisGolgi (Fig. 10), we wondered if in addition to the absence of
Sar1 there was an absence of the v-SNARE, VAMP7. VAMP7 is
present on PCTV formed in native cytosol (30) and is a component of the PCTV-Golgi SNARE complex (30). To address this
question, we incubated L-FABP-generated PCTV with cytosol
(which does not contain the integral membrane protein,
VAMP7) and found that these PCTV also concentrate VAMP7
from intestinal ER (Fig. 11, PCTV-Cytosol). Therefore, the lack
of fusion of these vesicles with cis-Golgi cannot be explained by
the absence of VAMP7. These data also support the thesis that
the vesicle formed by L-FABP is similar to that formed in native
cytosol with the exception that it does not contain Sar1 and
cannot fuse with the cis-Golgi.
To address the possibility that L- and I-FABP, which both
bind long chain FA, might interact in the process of budding
PCTV, we compared the effects of co-incubation of the two
proteins on PCTV generation. As shown in Fig. 12A, increasing
amounts of I- and L-FABP, up to 80 g each, resulted in a
proportional increase in the amount of budding activity. Activity was clearly greater for L-FABP than I-FABP, consistent with
prior results (Fig. 2). When both rI- and rL-FABP were added
together equally so that in toto they equaled the micrograms
listed on the x axis, the curve generated was very close to the
predicted curve using the data points for each FABP assayed
separately at the appropriate concentration (Fig. 12A). These
data indicate that there is no interaction between the two
rFABPs. Next we considered the possibility that because
I-FABP had less budding activity than L-FABP, it could interfere with the budding activity of L-FABP present in native
cytosol. To examine this question, we added progressively more
rI-FABP to a set amount (1 mg of protein) of rat cytosol and
found (Fig. 12B) that the budding activity of the resulting mixture was a straight line whose increase in activity corresponded
to the amount of rI-FABP added. No indication of inhibition by
I-FABP was found, suggesting that I-FABP does not interfere
with the budding activity of native cytosol.
Because we have found that I-FABP delivers and receives its
bound FA to model membrane surfaces by collision, and
L-FABP by diffusion (18, 41), and because I-FABP is expressed
only in the intestine, we questioned why L-FABP was a more
FIGURE 11. Immunoblots for Sar1 and VAMP7 in cytosol, ER, and PCTV.
The proteins from cytosol, ER, or PCTV generated with recombinant L-FABP,
which had been incubated with native cytosol for 30 min at 35 °C (PCTV,
Cytosol), or buffer (PCTV, Buffer) were separated by SDS-PAGE, and the proteins were transblotted to a nitrocellulose membrane and probed for Sar1 or
VAMP7, as indicated. PCTV incubated in buffer were not probed for VAMP7.
Detection was by ECL.
FIGURE 12. Recombinant I-FABP does not compete with L-FABP for PCTV
generation. A, [
3
H]TAG-loaded intestinal ER was incubated with the indicated amount of recombinant L- or I-FABP. The predicted PCTV budding
activity of both L- and I-FABP from the curves generated separately was used
to draw the predicted line (Predicted) of the activity when both recombinant
proteins were added together (I  L-FABP). When both proteins were added,
half of the stated value of each was added to the budding reaction to bring
the total amount added to the amount of protein indicated on the abscissa.
After the 30 min of incubation at 35 °C, the PCTV were isolated from a continuous sucrose gradient, and its [3
H]TAG-disintegrations/min was determined.
B, [
3
H]TAG-loaded intestinal ER was incubated for 30 min at 35 °C with an
ATP-regenerating system and native cytosol (1 mg of protein) plus the indicated amount of recombinant I-FABP. The PCTV formed were collected from
a continuous sucrose gradient, and its [3
H]TAG-disintegrations/min was
determined. The solid line represents a least squares regression curve.
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
JUNE 22, 2007•VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 17981
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
potent initiator of budding than I-FABP. One potential explanation for our findings is that L-FABP but not I-FABP binds to
intestinal ER membranes on incubation with native cytosol
under conditions in which budding is expected (ATP, Mg2,
cytosol, and ER at 35 °C for 30 min). Immunoblot analysis
showed that a small amount of L-FABP is present on the ER
prior to incubation, consistent with our prior observations (28).
L-FABP binding greatly increases on the ER membrane on
exposure to cytosol (Fig. 13, L-FABP). By contrast, although
there is ample I-FABP in intestinal cytosol, none is detected on
ER membranes either before or after incubation with cytosol
(Fig. 13, I-FABP). These data suggest that under appropriate
conditions, L-FABP interacts with the ER membrane, potentially initiating a budding reaction.
DISCUSSION
Intracellular transport vesicles concentrate cargo for export
to another intracellular organelle or membrane for processing,
storage, or secretion. Proteins on their surface are required for
correct targeting and fusion of the vesicles with the appropriate
membrane. For newly synthesized proteins exiting the ER, a
well defined system has been described that utilizes COPII proteins to bud vesicles from ER membranes whose destination is
the cis-Golgi. The initiator of these events is GTP-activated
Sar1 (42). Perhaps because of size constraints imposed by the
COPII proteins, the diameter of vesicles carrying newly synthesized proteins is 60– 80 nm (43). However, cargoes different
from newly synthesized proteins can engender different budding mechanisms. In particular, pre-chylomicrons in PCTV
have been shown to bud from intestinal ER membranes in the
absence of COPII proteins, although the COPII proteins are
required for subsequent fusion of the PCTV with the cis-Golgi
(28). The ability of the ER to bud PCTV despite the lack of
COPII proteins may be due in part to the much larger size
required by these transport vesicles, 250 nm, to enable them
to enclose TAG-rich pre-chylomicrons. In addition to the lack
of requirement of COPII machinery for budding, VAMP7, a
v-SNARE usually localized to a post-Golgi compartment, in the
intestine is uniquely localized to the ER and is concentrated on
PCTV (30). This novel mechanism suggests that a protein(s),
not considered previously to be part of the vesicle-forming
machinery, could be the initiating agent(s) in generating PCTV
at the ER surface. This alternative system of vesicle formation
may be useful under conditions in which vesicle formation is
tied to the intermittent dietary intake of lipid and not to the
constant requirement for movement of newly synthesized proteins to the Golgi.
By contrast with the COPII protein complex (576 kDa),
which mediates the budding of protein-containing vesicles
from the ER, we were surprised to find that a small molecular
weight protein such as L-FABP could, apparently by itself, initiate budding. That a small molecular weight protein was the
only budding factor in intestinal cytosol is suggested by the lack
of activity elsewhere in the elution pattern of whole cytosol on
size exclusion chromatography (Fig. 1A) as compared with the
COPII components, Sec23/24 and Sec13/31, which have a
much larger Stokes radius when similarly chromatographed
(44). Although we cannot rule out a larger active complex of
proteins that dissociates during the preparatory steps for generating cytosol, L-FABP alone effected the same degree of budding as found with intact cytosol. These data, using L-FABP at
concentrations comparable with those found in normal cytosol,
are strongly suggestive that the protein is sufficient for formation of PCTV from the ER.
The present in vitro studies are strongly supported by
recently reported in vivo studies. Newberry et al.(25) found that
L-FABP gene-disrupted mice fed a high fat diet retained more
TAG in their intestines, relative to WT mice. Furthermore,
L-FABP KO mice given the lipoprotein lipase inhibitor, tyloxapol, had a reduction in their serum TAG on being fed a lipid
bolus, suggesting a reduced chylomicron output from the intestine as compared with normal mice. These results are entirely
consistent with what would be predicted if L-FABP-initiated
chylomicron exit from the ER were impaired. Thus, the present
findings are likely to be of physiological significance for intestinal chylomicron assembly/secretion.
L-FABP has not been considered previously as a protein that
initiates vesicle budding; however, several known properties of
L-FABP are consistent with the novel function proposed
herein. For example, the correlation of L-FABP expression with
lipid absorption has long been appreciated. Intestinal L-FABP
expression is highest in the proximal intestine (45), and in both
rats and humans it has been localized to the cells of the villus
tips, the site of maximal lipid absorption (45, 46). Furthermore,
it has been shown in mice that lipid loading causes an increase
in the expression of L-FABP (47), and in Caco2 cells, both Land I-FABP are responsive to incubation with FA (48).
Although little has been reported about the effects of L-FABP
gene disruption in the intestine, L-FABP null mice grow normally, suggesting normal intestinal absorption. Of note, however, mouse chow has only 4% fat (w/w) so that a potential
intestinal defect in lipid absorption is not phenotypically
expressed in these mice. There is also an effect of L-FABP ablation in liver. On fasting, these mice accumulate TAG and have a
reduced uptake of FA (21) suggesting a role for L-FABP in
hepatic lipid metabolism.
Using in vitro model systems at physiologic ionic strength
and pH, we found that L-FABP transfers fatty acids to and from
acceptor phospholipid membranes by a diffusion-based mechanism that does not involve L-FABP-membrane interaction
FIGURE 13. Recombinant L- but not I-FABP binds to intestinal ER membranes. Intestinal ER (1 mg of protein) was incubated with native cytosol (1
mg of protein) (lanes 1 and 5) or either recombinant L- or I-FABP (40 g of
protein) (lanes 2 and 6) for 30 min at 35 °C with an ATP-regenerating system.
Intestinal ER preincubation(lanes 3 and7) and intestinal cytosol(lanes 4 and8)
were also evaluated. The proteins from ER pre- or postincubation or cytosol
were separated by SDS-PAGE, transblotted to a nitrocellulose membrane,
and probed with anti-L-FABP (L-FABP) or anti-I-FABP (I-FABP) antibodies as
indicated below the lane numbers. Detection was by ECL.
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
17982 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25•JUNE 22, 2007
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
(18, 41). However, we postulated that in vivo, L-FABP could be
interacting with specific membrane proteins and/or lipid
domains, thereby acting not only as a cytosolic reservoir for
long chain FA but also perhaps as a regulator of intracellular
lipid trafficking as well (18). L-FABP binding to membranes was
shown to occur at very low ionic strength, presumably because
of an absence of surface charge shielding (18, 49). In the present
results, we find that L-FABP is detectable in freshly isolated
intestinal ER fractions and that incubation of ER with intestinal
cytosol results in a large increase in bound L-FABP but not
I-FABP. Interestingly, although I-FABP interactions with
membranes have been demonstrated in vitro (50, 51), and subcellular fractionation of jejunal mucosa shows a small amount
of I-FABP to remain membrane-associated (52), the specific
conditions that promote PCTV generation do not appear to
support the association of I-FABP with membranes.
Although it seems remarkable that a small molecular weight
(14 kDa) protein such as L-FABP is able to cause ER membrane deformation and fission, a similar property has been
reported for the 21-kDa protein Sar1p. Recently, Lee et al.
(53) reported that Sar1p could initiate cargo sorting, membrane
deformation, and tubulation but not fission in a liposomal system. The membrane perturbation is postulated to occur by the
insertion of the N-terminal -helix of Sar1p into the liposome.
In the GDP-bound state, the Sar1p -helix is enclosed in a
hydrophobic pocket that is altered on GTP exchange by Sec12,
making the -helix available for membrane insertion. An examination of the tertiary structure of L-FABP shows that it contains two short -helical segments (54), and in vitro studies
suggest that this domain is responsible for the FA transport
properties of the protein (55). It is thus possible that protein-ER
membrane/ER protein interactions can occur for L-FABP,
potentially involving the helix domain. It is also possible that
L-FABP causes membrane deformation via ligand delivery to
the membrane. L-FABP is known to bind lysophospholipids
(56), which have a so-called “inverted cone” shape, and hence to
promote nonbilayer phases to form in membranes (57). Thus,
perhaps L-FABP becomes bound to intestinal ER membranes
by protein-protein interaction and delivers its lysophospholipid
ligand to the ER membrane, resulting in sufficient deformation
to initiate bud formation.
As judged by its TAG, apoB48, and apoAIV cargo, the vesicle
formed using L-FABP contains chylomicrons. Moreover, the
vesicle is sealed, as evidenced by the interior contents being
resistant to proteinase K treatment. This is consistent with our
prior data showing that COPII proteins are not required for
budding PCTV (28). However, like PCTV formed in the
absence of COPII proteins (28), the L-FABP-generated vesicle
is not fully functional in that it is not able to fuse with the
cis-Golgi. Our current data support the lack of a role for COPII
proteins in the selection of pre-chylomicron cargo for inclusion
in PCTV, another proposed function of both Sar1 (58) and
Sec24 (59), in the formation of protein vesicles. The COPII
proteins may, however, participate in the selection of other
cargo such as p58 for PCTV (28). The lack of recruitment of
p58 for PCTV in the absence of COPII proteins may be
important for Golgi fusion because p58 recruits COPI proteins,
required for fusion of ER vesicles with cis-Golgi (60).
It is not likely that L-FABP could be releasing PCTV in a
nonspecific manner. In particular, when more than 150 g of
L-FABP was added to ER membranes, there was no further
increase in PCTV formation, indicating that the mechanism for
PCTV generation initiated by L-FABP becomes saturated.
Moreover, the amount of L-FABP used in these studies (typically 40 g) is in the physiologic range reported previously for
this abundant enterocyte protein (14). Furthermore, when
recombinant proteins other than L-FABP of near the same
molecular weight were added, either none (acyl CoA-binding
protein, etc.) or considerably less (I-FABP) PCTV budding
activity was observed. Finally, PCTV generated by L-FABP, like
those generated using native cytosol, not only concentrate their
cargo lipoproteins, apoB48 and apoAIV, from their parent ER
but also concentrate VAMP7, the unique v-SNARE for ER to
Golgi transport employed by PCTV for fusion with the Golgi
(30). These results are consistent with a specific action of
L-FABP on intestinal ER membranes to generate a cargo-containing vesicle.
The amount of L-FABP used in these studies, 40 g of protein, is consistent with the ratio of L-FABP in cytosol to the
amount of ER present in vivo in rat enterocytes. Normal cytosol
contains 23 g of L-FABP per mg of cytosol protein (14), but
only 18% of total enterocyte protein is present in the ER (61).
This should be compared with the 33% of the incubation mixture used here represented by ER protein (500 g of ER protein,
1 mg of cytosol protein). Using the percentage of ER protein
under the in vivo conditions compared with our in vitro conditions, the amount of L-FABP expected in the cytosol would be
42 g. These data may at least explain in part the equivalence in
budding activity using 40 g of L-FABP versus 1 mg of native
cytosol protein.
It is not yet known whether L-FABP requires bound FA in
order to effectively generate PCTV. Although we used delipidated protein for exogenous addition to the ER fractions, it is
still possible that ER-derived FA became bound to the added
protein. Nevertheless, the fact that other FA-binding proteins,
including I-FABP (Fig. 2) and albumin (data not shown), did not
substitute for L-FABP, implies that the FA-binding properties
of the protein may not be necessary for its function in PCTV
budding.
In sum, we describe a novel physiological function for
L-FABP, a small molecular weight protein that is abundantly
expressed in both intestine and liver. Utilizing L-FABP and
intestinal ER membranes, we have been able to generate a
sealed vesicle in which the pre-chylomicron TAG and associated apolipoproteins have been selected and nonspecific ER
luminal and membrane proteins excluded. This proposed role
for L-FABP is the first physiological function to be directly
demonstrated for this abundant intestinal cytosolic protein.
The vesicle generated by L-FABP is not able to fuse with intestinal cis-Golgi. We postulate that this is because of the inability
of the vesicle to attract Sar1 to its surface and thus the remainder of the COPII proteins, leaving it lacking specific targeting
information. It is likely that an as yet unidentified additional
protein is required for the PCTV to acquire Sar1, making it
fusion-competent with the Golgi.
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
JUNE 22, 2007•VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 17983
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
REFERENCES
1. Stall, A., Hirsch, D. J., Gemini, R. E., Unready, S., Ge, P., Watson, N., Patel,
S., Culture, M., Raymond, A., Tartaglia, L. A., and Lodish, H. F. (1999) Mol.
Cell 4, 299–308
2. Stremmel, W. (1988) J. Clin. Invest. 82, 2001–2010
3. Berk, P. D., and Stump, D. D. (1999) Mol. Cell. Biochem. 192, 17–31
4. Schoeller, C., Keelan, M., Mulvey, G., Stremmel, W., and Thompson, A. B.
(1995) Clin. Invest. Med. 18, 380–388
5. Coburn, C. T., Knapp, F. F., Febbraio, M., Beets, A. L., Silverstein, R. L., and
Abumrad, N. A. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 32523–32529
6. Febbraio, M., Abumrad, N. A., Hajjar, D. P., Sharma, K., Cheng, W.,
Pearce, S. F., and Silverstein, R. L. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 19055–19062
7. Abumrad, N., and Storch, J. (2006) in Physiology of the Gastrointestinal
Tract (Johnson, L. R., ed), Fourth Ed., pp. 1693–1709, Academic Press,
Orlando, FL
8. Drover, V. A., Ajmal, M., Nassir, F., Davidson, N. O., Nauli, A. M., Sahoo,
D., Tso, P., and Abumrad, N. A. (2005) J. Clin. Invest. 115, 1290–1297
9. Murota, K., and Storch, J. (2005) J. Nutr. 135, 1626–1630
10. Mansbach, C. M., II, and Dowell, R. (2000) J. Lipid Res. 41, 605–612
11. Gordon, J. I., Elshourbagy, N., Lowe, J. B., Liao, W. S., Alpers, D. H., and
Taylor, J. M. (1985) J. Biol. Chem. 260, 1995–1998
12. Ockner, R. K., Manning, J. A., Poppenhausen, R. B., and Ho, W. K. (1972)
Science 177, 56–58
13. Mishkin, S. L., Stein, Z., Gatmaitan, X., and Arias, I. M. (1972) Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 47, 997–1003
14. Bass, N. A., Manning, J. A., Ockner, R. K., Gordon, J. I., Seetharam, S., and
Alpers, D. H. (1985) J. Biol. Chem. 260, 1432–1436
15. Cistola, D. P., Sacchettini, J. C., Banaszak, L., Walsh, M. T., and Gordon,
J. I. (1989) J. Biol. Chem. 264, 2700–2710
16. Glatz, J. F., and van der Vusse, G. J. (1996) Prog. Lipid Res. 35, 243–282
17. Storch, J. (1993) Mol. Cell. Biochem. 123, 45–53
18. Hsu, K.-T., and Storch, J. (1996) J. Biol. Chem. 271, 13317–13323
19. Luxon, B. A., and Milliano, M. T. (1999) Am. J. Physiol. 277, G361–G366
20. Weisiger, R. A. (1996) Hepatology 24, 1288–1295
21. Newberry, E. P., Xie, Y., Kennedy, S., Han, X., Buhman, K. K., Luo, J.,
Gross, R. W., and Davidson, N. O. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 51664–51672
22. Martin, G. G., Danneberg, H., Kumar, L. S., Atshaves, B. P., Erol, E., Bader,
M., Schroeder, F., and Binas, B. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278, 21429–21438
23. Keler, T., and Sorof, S. (1993) J. Cell. Physiol. 157, 33–40
24. Schachtrup, C., Emmler, T., Bleck, B., Sandqvist, A., and Spener, F. (2004)
Biochem. J. 382, 239–245
25. Newberry, E. P., Xie, Y., Kennedy, S. M., and Davidson, N. O. (2006)
Hepatology 44, 1191–1205
26. Mansbach, C. M., II, and Nevin, P. (1998) J. Lipid Res. 39, 963–968
27. Zilversmit, D. B. (1967) Fed. Proc. 26, 1599–1605
28. Siddiqi, S. A., Gorelick, F. S., Mahan, J. T., and Mansbach, C. M., II (2003)
J. Cell Sci. 116, 415–427
29. Kumar, N. S., and Mansbach, C. M., II (1999) Am. J. Physiol. 276,
G378–G386
30. Siddiqi, S. A., Mahan, J. T., Siddiqi, S., Gorelick, F. S., and Mansbach, C. M.,
II. (2006) J. Cell Sci. 119, 943–950
31. Storch, J., and Bass, N. M. (1990) J. Biol. Chem. 265, 7827–7831
32. Kumar, N. S., and Mansbach, C. M., II (1997) Am. J. Physiol. 273,
G18–G30
33. Mansbach, C. M., II, and Arnold, A. (1986) Am. J. Physiol. 251,
G263–G269
34. Dole, V. P., and Hamlin, J. T., III (1962) Physiol. Rev. 42, 674–701
35. Coleman, R., and Bell, R. (1976) J. Biol. Chem. 251, 4537–4543
36. Mansbach, C. M., II, and Dowell, R. F. (1995) Am. J. Physiol. 269,
G144–G152
37. Hayashi, H., Fujimoto, K., Cardelli, J. A., Nutting, D. F., Bergstedt, S., and
Tso, P. (1990) Am. J. Physiol. 259, G709–G719
38. Manowitz, N. R., Tso, P., Drake, D. S., Frase, S., and Sabesin, S. M. (1986)
J. Lipid Res. 27, 196–207
39. Mansbach, C. M., II, Cohen, R. S., and Leff, P. B. (1975) J. Clin. Invest. 56,
781–791
40. Kim, J., Hamamoto, S., Ravazzola, M., Orci, L., and Schekman, R. (2005)
J. Biol. Chem. 280, 7758–7768
41. Thumser, A. E., and Storch, J. (2000) J. Lipid Res. 41, 647–656
42. Aridor, M., and Balch, W. E. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 35673–35676
43. Matsuoka, K., Orci, L., Amherdt, M., Bednarek, S. Y., Hamamoto, S.,
Schekman, R., and Yeung, T. (1998) Cell 93, 263–275
44. Lederkremer, G. Z., Cheng, Y., Petre, B. M., Vogan, E., Springer, S., Schekman, R.,Walz, T., and Kirchhausen, T. (2001) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
98, 10704–10709
45. Shields, H. M., Bates, M. L., Bass, N. M., Best, C. J., Alpers, D. H., and
Ockner, R. K. (1986) J. Lipid Res. 27, 549–557
46. Pelsers, M. M., Namiot, Z., Kisielewski,W., Namiot, A., Januszkiewicz, M.,
Hermens, W. T., and Glatz, J. F. (2003) Clin. Biochem. 36, 529–535
47. Poirier, H., Niot, I., Degrace, P., Monnot, M. C., Bernard, A., and Besnard,
P. (1997) Am. J. Physiol. 273, G289–G295
48. Dube, N., Delvin, E., Yotov, W., Garofolo, C., Bendayan, M., Veerkamp,
J. H., and Levy, E. (2001) J. Cell. Biochem. 81, 613–620
49. Davies, J. K., Thumser, A. E., and Wilton, D. C. (1999) Biochemistry 38,
16932–16940
50. Corsico, B., Cistola, D. P., Frieden, C., and Storch, J. (1998) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 12174–12178
51. Wu, F., Corsico, B., Flach, C. R., Cistola, D. P., Storch, J., and Mendelsohn,
R. (2001) Biochemistry 40, 1976–1983
52. Ockner, R. K., and Manning, J. A. (1974) J. Clin. Invest. 54, 326–338
53. Lee, M. C. S., Orci, L., Hamamoto, S., Futai, E., Ravazzola, M., and Schekman, R. (2005) Cell 122, 605–617
54. Thompson, J., Winter, N., Terwey, D., Bratt, J., and Banaszak, L. (1997)
J. Biol. Chem. 272, 7140–7150
55. Corsico, B., Liou, H. L., and Storch, J. (2004) Biochemistry 43, 3600–3607
56. Burrier, R. E., and Brecher, P. (1986) Biochim. Biophys. Acta 879, 229–239
57. Cullis, P. R., and Hope, M. J. (1985) Biochemistry of Lipids and Membranes, pp. 25–72, Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Co., Menlo Park, CA
58. Aridor, M., Fish, K. N., Bannykh, S., Weisman, J., Roberts, T. H.,
Lippincott-Schwartz, J., and Balch, W. E. (2001) J. Cell Biol. 152, 213–229
59. Miller, E. A., Liu, Y., Barlowe, C., and Schekman, R. (2005) Mol. Biol. Cell
16, 3719–3726
60. Tisdale, E. J., Plutner, H., Matteson, J., and Balch, W. E. (1997) J. Cell Biol.
137, 581–593
61. Hubscher, G., West, S. R., and Brindley, D. N. (1965) Biochem. J. 97,
629–642
L-FABP Initiates Pre-chylomicron Transport Vesicle Budding
17984 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 282•NUMBER 25•JUNE 22, 2007
 by guest on September 18, 2020 http://www.jbc.org/ Downloaded from 
Bert Binas, Tarun Gheyi, Judith Storch and Charles M. Mansbach II
Indira Neeli, Shadab A. Siddiqi, Shahzad Siddiqi, James Mahan, William S. Lagakos,
Vesicles from Intestinal Endoplasmic Reticulum
Liver Fatty Acid-binding Protein Initiates Budding of Pre-chylomicron Transport
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M610765200 originally published online April 20, 2007