Study of the effects of dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids: Molecular mechanisms
involved in intestinal inflammation
By Bianca Knocha,b, Matthew P.G. Barnett a
, Nicole C. Roya and Warren C. McNabba,*
a Food, Metabolism & Microbiology Section, Food & Textiles Group, AgResearch Grasslands,
Private Bag 11008, Tennent Drive, Palmerston North 4442, New Zealand b Institute of Food, Nutrition & Human Health, Massey University, Palmerston North 4442, New Zealand
* Corresponding author: warren.mcnabb@agresearch.co.nz
RESUMEN
Estudio del efecto de los ácidos grasos poliinsaturados de la dieta: Mecanismos moleculares involucrados
en la inflamación intestinal.
El uso de técnicas «omic» en combinación con sistemas
modelo y herramientas moleculares nos permiten entender
como los alimentos y sus componentes actúan en las rutas
metabólicas que regulan los procesos transcripcionales. Los
ácidos grasos poliinsaturados tienen efectos nutricionales y
metabólicos diferenciadores porque producen una elevación
de los productos regulados por lípidos y afectan a la expresión de varios genes involucrados en la inflamación intestinal. La presente revisión se enfoca en los efectos moleculares de los ácidos grasos poliinsaturados de la dieta en la
inflamación intestinal.
PALABRAS CLAVE: Ácidos grasos poliinsaturados n-3 y
n-6 de la dieta – Gen – Inflamación intestinal.
SUMMARY
Study of the effects of dietary polyunsaturated fatty
acids: Molecular mechanisms involved in intestinal
inflammation.
The use of “omics” techniques in combination with model
systems and molecular tools allows to understand how foods
and food components act on metabolic pathways to regulate
transcriptional processes. Polyunsaturated fatty acids have
distinctive nutritional and metabolic effects because they give
rise to lipid mediated products and affect the expression of
various genes involved in intestinal inflammation. The present
review focuses on the molecular effects of dietary
polyunsaturated fatty acids on intestinal inflammation.
KEY-WORDS: Dietary n-3 and n-6 polyunsaturated fatty
acid – Gene – Intestinal inflammation.
1. INTRODUCTION
Traditional nutrition research has dealt with
metabolic and physiological responses of the body
to nutrients and has focussed on nutrient
deficiencies in health and disease. Driven by the
advances in molecular biology, biochemistry and
genetics, nutrition research has more recently
shifted its focus to genotype-based, personalised
nutrition to maintain an individual’s health and
prevent diet-related diseases (Kussmann et al.,
2006). The research field of gene-nutrient
interactions investigates molecular effects of foods
and food components with the use of “omics”
technologies. These have the potential to define
how nutrition influences metabolic and homeostatic
pathways, how diet regulates genes in diet-related
diseases and to what extent an individual’s genetic
background contributes to these diseases (Müller
and Kersten, 2003; Bünger et al., 2007) or other
phenotypes.
Chronic intestinal inflammation is a hallmark of
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases (Crohn’s Disease
(CD) and Ulcerative Colitis (UC)), which together
affect over 3.5 million people worldwide
(Bassaganya-Riera and Hontecillas, 2006).
Northern Europe and North America have reported
the highest incidence rates and prevalence (Torres
and Rios, 2008). CD is a condition for which genetic
and dietary factors are known to predispose
individuals (Podolsky et al., 2002), is
immunologically mediated, and is characterized by
destruction of the intestinal mucosa (BassaganyaRiera and Hontecillas, 2006). In New Zealand, 3075
new CD cases (representing the total number in the
small and/or large intestine, and cases of
unspecified or regional enteritis) have been
registered from the last half of 2002 to the
beginning of 2006. CD in the large intestine was
more common with an increase of 16% (246 cases
in 2005/06) compared to the small intestine (180
cases in 2005/06). CD identified in both small and
large intestine remained constant from 2002 to
2006, with approximately 140 new cases per year
(New Zealand Health Information Service, 2007).
The use of “omics” technologies, together with a
range of simplified model systems and molecular
tools, allow us to better understand the basic
molecular mechanisms of how foods and food
components may ameliorate or prevent a
phenotype, e.g. disease (Müller and Kersten, 2003).
Accumulating evidence in humans and in animal
models shows a beneficial effect of long-chain
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), particularly n-3
PUFA, for a variety of inflammatory diseases
(Stulnig, 2003), and these molecules may therefore
prove to be of benefit for people with either UC or
Study of the effects of dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids: Molecular mechanisms
involved in intestinal inflammation
By Bianca Knocha,b, Matthew P.G. Barnett a
, Nicole C. Roya and Warren C. McNabba,*
a Food, Metabolism & Microbiology Section, Food & Textiles Group, AgResearch Grasslands,
Private Bag 11008, Tennent Drive, Palmerston North 4442, New Zealand b Institute of Food, Nutrition & Human Health, Massey University, Palmerston North 4442, New Zealand
* Corresponding author: warren.mcnabb@agresearch.co.nz
GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1),
ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009,
ISSN: 0017-3495
DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508
CD. n-3 PUFA have been shown to modulate the
expression of genes that code for proteins involved
in inflammation, lipid metabolism and energy
utilization (Deckelbaum et al., 2006).
This review will provide an overview of the
current knowledge on the effects of the two major
classes of PUFA, n-3 and n-6 PUFA, on intestinal
inflammation as determined using animal models
and human studies. The mechanisms whereby n-3
and n-6 PUFA modulate gene expression involve
multiple metabolic pathways and cross-talk
between genes controlling lipid homeostasis, and
the existing knowledge will be presented.
2. POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS,
INFLAMMATION AND IMMUNE RESPONSE
PUFA modulate multiple processes including
innate and acquired immunity, infectious
pathologies due to bacteria and the course of
chronic diseases such as inflammatory diseases
(Calder, 2003; Mutch et al., 2005). The two major
classes of PUFA, n-3 and n-6, are named after the
first unsaturated carbon in the double bond. These
two PUFA families, along with their precursors -
linolenic acid (18:3n-3) and linoleic acid (18:2n-6),
are essential and must be derived from the diet.
Linoleic acid (n-6) is the major PUFA in
Westernized diets, followed by -linolenic acid (n-3)
(Schmitz and Ecker, 2008). The major sources of
linoleic acid are vegetable oils such as corn,
safflower, soybean and sunflower oil, whereas -
linolenic acid can be mostly found in linseed oil,
rapeseed, walnuts and blackcurrant oil, but also in
dark green leafy plants (Dommels et al., 2002).
Linoleic acid and -linolenic acid are
metabolized in mammalian cells by desaturase and
elongation enzymes (Figure 1). Linoleic acid is
converted to -linolenic acid and dihomo- -
linolenic acid to form arachidonic acid (AA; 20:4n-6)
(Schmitz and Ecker, 2008). AA is the major n-6
PUFA and dietary linoleic acid is the main source of
tissue AA, although dietary AA is also found in lean
meats and meat fat (Dommels et al., 2002). The n3 fatty acid -linolenic acid is converted to
stearidonic acid and eicosatetraenoic acid, then
further converted to eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA;
20:5n-3) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6nGRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508 9
STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF DIETARY POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS: MOLECULAR MECHANISMS INVOLVED...
∆6-desaturase
elongase
∆5-desaturase
elongase
elongase
∆6-desaturase
ß-oxidation
n-6 family n-3 family
Linoleicacid
(LA; 18:2n-6)
(GLA; 18:3n-6)
Dihomo- -linolenic acid
(DGLA; 20:3n-6)
Arachidonicacid
(AA; 20:4n-6)
Adrenicacid
(ADA; 22:4n-6)
Tetracosatetraenoicacid
(TTA; 24:4n-6)
Tetracosapentaenoic acid
(TPA; 24:5n-6)
Docosapentaenoicacid
(DPA; 22:5n-6)
α-Linolenicacid
(ALA; 18:3n-3)
Stearidonic acid
(STA; 18:4n-3)
Eicosatetraenoic acid
(ETA; 20:4n-3)
Eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA; 20:5n-3)
Docosapentaenoicacid
(DPA; 22:5n-3)
Tetracosapentaenoicacid
(TPA; 24:5n-3)
Tetracosahexaenoicacid
(THA; 24:6n-3)
Docosahexaenoicacid
(DHA; 22:6n-3)
Prostaglandins
and
Thromboxanes
(2-series)
Leukotrienes
(4-series)
Epoxyeicosatrienoic
and
Hydroxyleicosatertraenoic
derivates
Lipoxins
COX
L OX
Prostaglandins
and
Thromboxanes
(3-series)
Leukotrienes
(5-series)
Resolvins
COX LOX
γ
γ-Linolenicacid
O Figure 1
Metabolism of n-3 and n-6 PUFA (created from information in Mills et al., 2005 and Schmitz and Ecker, 2008).
COX, cyclo-oxygenase; LOX, lipoxygenase.
3). EPA and DHA are the major n-3 PUFA sources
in marine fish such as salmon, tuna, herring,
mackerel and anchovy (Dommels et al., 2002). AA
and EPA can be further metabolized to more highly
polyunsaturated fatty acids or activate a series of
lipid mediators as shown in Figure 1 (Schmitz and
Ecker, 2008).
2.1. PUFA-derived mediators
Inflammation and inflammatory responses are
part of the normal, innate immune response as long
as they occur in a controlled manner. Inappropriate
inflammatory responses are characterized by upregulation of adhesion molecules and subsequent
induction of leukocyte movement into sites of
inflammation, production of inflammatory mediators
and host tissue damage (Calder, 2006).
Eicosanoids generated from 20-carbon PUFA (n-6)
are the key link between PUFA and inflammation.
Inflammatory cells usually contain high amounts of
n-6 AA and low amounts of other 20-carbon PUFA
such as EPA. High amounts of interleukins and the
pro-inflammatory eicosanoids produced by AA
metabolism (and released from membrane
phospholipids) have an important role in the early
phase of inflammatory activation (Simopoulos,
2002; Calder, 2008). AA can be converted to series2 prostaglandins (PG) and thromboxanes (TX),
series-4 leukotrienes (LT), to several hydroperoxyand hydroxy-eicosatetraenoic derivatives, and to
lipoxins. Cyclo-oxygenases (COX) and
lipoxygenases (LOX) are enzymes that catalyze
these conversions (Figure 1). EPA is converted to
series-3 PG and TX eicosanoids, series-5 LT, and
to several hydroperoxy- and hydroxyeicosapentaenoic derivatives and resolvins.
Overall, mediators derived from EPA and DHA have
anti-inflammatory properties while mediators
formed from AA exert mostly pro-inflammatory or
other metabolic effects (Table 1). These lipid
mediators have been and are still studied in order to
understand their pro- or anti-inflammatory actions
(Bannenberg et al., 2007).
The theory that n-3 PUFA show antiinflammatory effects by competing with the
incorporation of AA into membrane phospholipids,
replacing it and thereby blocking the production of
pro-inflammatory eicosanoids (especially PGE2 and
LTB4), has long been established (Serhan and
Chiang, 2008). The AA-derived PGE2 has anti- and
pro-inflammatory modulation effects. It can induce
COX2, and in this way induces its own synthesis
and the production of the pro-inflammatory cytokine
IL6 in macrophages. In contrast, PGE2 inhibits 5-
lipoxygenase to decrease the production of proinflammatory 4-series leukotrienes and can induce
15-lipoxygenase to form anti-inflammatory lipoxins
(LX) (Schmitz and Ecker, 2008).
Lipoxins belong to a new family of PUFA-derived
lipid mediators, including AA-derived aspirintriggered lipoxins; EPA-derived resolvin E-series
(RvEs); DHA-derived resolvin D-series (RvDs) and
protectins, which serve as endogenous agonists
controlling inflammation by stimulating resolution
(Serhan and Chiang, 2008). Bannenberg (2007)
defined resolution as an essential part of the acute
inflammatory response including the formation of
pro- and anti-inflammatory and pro-resolution lipid
mediators. These mediators serve as ligands to
activate specific receptors and thus play an
important role in the progression of the normal
inflammatory response (Bannenberg et al., 2007;
Serhan and Chiang, 2008). Resolution of
10 GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508
BIANCA KNOCH, MATTHEW P.G. BARNETT, NICOLE C. ROY AND WARREN C. MCNABB
Table 1
n-3 and n-6 PUFA-derived lipid mediators and their metabolic effects
AA (n-6)- EPA (n-3)-
Mediator effects derived lipid derived lipid Mediator effects
mediators mediators
Anti-inflammatory PGD2 Prostaglandins PGD3 Less inflammatory
Pro-inflammatory PGE2 PGE3 Anti-inflammatory
Vasodilatation PGF2 PGF3
PGI2 PGI3
Pro-inflammatory TXA2 Thromboxanes TXA3 Less inflammatory
Vasoconstriction TXB2 TXB3 Vasodilatation
Platelet Weaker platelet
aggregation aggregation
Pro-inflammatory LTB4 Leukotrienes LTB5 Less inflammatory
Chemotaxis LTC4 LTC5
of phagocytes LTD4 LTD5
LTE4 LTE5
Anti-inflammatory LXA4 Lipoxins
Pro-resolving LXB4
Resolvins RvE1 Anti-inflammatory
RvE2
inflammation contributes to molecular events that
remove inflammatory cells and restore tissue
integrity (Bannenberg et al., 2007).
LXA4 exerts potent anti-inflammatory effects
mediated through the activation of a specific Gprotein coupled lipoxin receptor and activates
receptor-mediated molecular pathways to counterregulate acute inflammation (Bannenberg et al.,
2007). Resolvins are oxygenated products derived
from EPA and DHA and were first identified during
the resolution phase of acute inflammation. The
EPA-derived resolvin E1, shows anti-inflammatory
actions by binding to a G-protein coupled receptor
to inhibit nuclear factor-B (NFB) activation and
thus block the synthesis of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and chemokines (Bannenberg et al.,
2007, Schmitz and Ecker, 2008). RvE1 receptor
is also expressed in gastrointestinal tissue
(Bannenberg et al., 2007).
2.2. Immunomodulatory mechanisms
From early studies of patients with IBD a
link between PUFA, the immune system and
pathogenesis of CD was suggested. These studies
reported decreased concentrations of n-3 PUFA in
plasma phospholipids (Sheehan et al., 1992) and in
adipose tissue (Geerling et al., 1999) and also
decreased serum concentrations of total n-3 PUFA
in IBD patients compared with control patients
(Kuroki et al., 1997). The loss of n-3 PUFA
increases the n-6:n-3 ratio, which implies the
production of more pro-inflammatory eicosanoids.
Several aspects of the immunomodulatory
effects of PUFA in intestinal inflammation have
recently been investigated, e.g. the role of PUFA
in modulation of pro- and anti-inflammatory
eicosanoids, membrane fluidity, signal transduction,
antigen presentation, gene expression and
gastrointestinal flora (Mills et al., 2005). Mills et al.,
(2005) reviewed studies in humans and animals
which reported that dietary n-3-rich fish oil
supplementation decreased AA levels in the
membrane as AA was replaced by n-3 PUFA. As
a result of the competitive inhibition of AA
metabolism, less pro-inflammatory eicosanoids
are produced by AA. Immune cells, such as
macrophages, are the main source of eicosanoids.
Prostaglandins, for example, can suppress T
lymphocyte proliferation, T cell-mediated toxicity,
IL2 production and natural killer cell activity in vitro
(Goodwin and Ceuppens, 1983). Thus eicosanoids
act directly on immune cells and are modulated
themselves by PUFA (Mills et al., 2005).
PUFA have an important role in membrane
structure. Incorporation of PUFA into membrane
lipids increases membrane fluidity and affects the
conformation of membrane protein complexes.
Some membrane-bound enzymes and receptors
are sensitive to the particular fatty acids that
surround them (Mills et al., 2005). There are also
membrane regions (the so-called lipid rafts)
containing cholesterol, sphingolipids and signalling
molecules, where signalling events can take place
(Stulnig, 2003; Mills et al., 2005). Dietary n-3 PUFA
are able to decrease the sphingomyelin content of
lipid rafts in vivo. Displacement of acylated proteins
from membrane lipid rafts is seen with EPA but to a
lesser extent with AA and could be due to altered
protein acylation after PUFA incorporation or
changes in lipid raft composition (Stulnig, 2003).
PUFA are involved in many intracellular signal
transduction pathways in immune cells, specifically
in T and B-lymphocytes. Long chain fatty acids
can modulate signalling pathways and target
gene expression by reciprocal modulation of the
activation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and its
downstream signalling pathways. They suppress
NFB activation and COX2 expression that are
inducible by a TLR2 agonist in macrophages.
Different types of fatty acids modulate different TLR
molecules, suggesting a modulatory role for dietary
fatty acids in immune and inflammatory responses
by TLR activation in the intestine. Changes in
dietary fat composition could modulate signalling
pathways downstream of TLR molecules, as well as
targeting gene expression and subsequent cellular
responses (Mills et al., 2005).
In vitro and in vivo experiments suggest that the
immunomodulatory mechanism of n-3 PUFA might
occur via modulation of antigen-presenting cell
function. Fish oil supplementation to healthy
volunteers decreased the expression of membranebound MHC II antigen-presenting molecules in
peripheral blood monocytes. Furthermore, a role
for PUFA in modulating antigen-presenting cell
function is supported by the observation that the
expression of adhesion molecules such as
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) is
down-regulated by n-3 PUFA. Adhesion molecule
expression enables the antigen bearing cells in
circulation to reach lymphoid areas to present
antigen to T lymphocytes and stimulate an immune
response (Mills et al., 2005).
Mucosal inflammation in IBD results from an
inappropriate inflammatory response to microbiota
in the intestine. TLR molecules are involved in the
recognition of and the response to commensal
microbiota or to pathogens, acting as pattern
recognition receptors (Mills et al, 2005; Niess and
Reinecker, 2006). It has been shown that intestinal
microbiota play an important role in human colitis;
reduced levels of Bifidobacteria have been
observed in patients with CD (Favier et al., 1997).
PUFA may affect the composition of the intestinal
microbiota and thus alter the balance of
inflammation in the intestine. It is suggested that
dietary PUFA affect mucosal adhesion sites
for gastrointestinal bacteria (e.g. Lactobacilli)
(Kankaanpää et al., 2001) by altering the
composition of the intestinal wall (Mills et al., 2005).
This implies that dietary PUFA could enhance the
functions of probiotic bacteria in the gastrointestinal
tract, e.g. by stimulating adhesion (Mills et al., 2005;
Torres and Ríos, 2008).
GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508 11
STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF DIETARY POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS: MOLECULAR MECHANISMS INVOLVED...
Immune responses in IBD patients are triggered
by the presence of commensal intestinal bacteria
(Ewaschuk and Dieleman, 2006). Most animal
models of IBD (such as IL10 gene-deficient mice
and HLA-B27 transgenic rats) fail to develop
chronic intestinal inflammation when raised in
germ-free conditions (Taurog et al., 1994; Sellon et
al., 1998). Enterococcus faecalis is a commensal
bacterium of the intestinal microbiota and has been
used to induce colitis in IL10 gene-deficient mice,
both as a single defined strain (Balish and Warner,
2002) and in a combined inoculum with complex
intestinal flora (Roy et al., 2007). It would therefore
seem that the balance between beneficial and
aggressive intestinal bacteria is an important factor
which can influence the transition from mucosal
homeostasis to chronic inflammation (Ewaschuk
and Dieleman, 2006).
3. POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACID
REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION
IN IBD
Long chain fatty acids have been known to
contribute to enterocyte function and pathology
(Heimerl et al., 2006). In particular, long chain n-3
and n-6 PUFA are incorporated into biological
membranes and regulate such processes as
energy metabolism, eicosanoid production, signal
transduction and regulation of gene expression
(Mutch et al., 2005; Deckelbaum et al., 2006). N-3
PUFA modulate the expression of genes that code
for proteins involved in inflammation, lipid
metabolism and energy utilization in several tissues
and organs. They reduce inflammation and induce
lipid oxidation for enhanced energy utilization
(Deckelbaum et al., 2006). Long chain PUFA
modulate inflammatory processes by altering fatty
acid metabolism in the intestinal epithelial cells
(Belluzzi, 2002). There are multiple mechanisms
whereby long chain PUFA, especially n-3 PUFA,
can affect transcription factor-dependent gene
expression, the expression of nuclear hormone
receptors and lipid second messengers. The latter
activate other genes or other cellular events which
affect gene expression, e.g. production of n-3
metabolites and subsequent gene expression
(Deckelbaum et al., 2006).
3.1. Fatty acid metabolism
It has been shown that the altered expression of
genes involved in fatty acid metabolism in IBD may
be a consequence of inflammation, but may also
contribute to IBD pathophysiology. Genes involved in
uptake and activation of fatty acids include fatty acid
transport proteins (FATP, solute carrier family 27),
fatty acid binding proteins (FABP) and long chain
acyl-CoA synthases (ACSL) (Heimerl et al., 2006).
The FATP transmembrane proteins in the
intestinal membrane increase the uptake of long
chain PUFA into cells and FATP gene expression
levels directly correlate with long chain PUFA
uptake. Six FATP proteins have been found in all
fatty acid-metabolizing tissues of the human body
(Stahl, 2004). High expression levels of FATP2 and
FATP4 transporter genes have been found in ileum
and colon tissues of healthy patients. In the colon of
CD and UC patients, FATP4 gene expression was
down-regulated compared to control tissues
(Heimerl et al, 2006).
Other types of proteins (CD36 molecule, FABP
and ACSL) can facilitate the uptake of PUFA. It is
suggested that long chain PUFA either bind directly
to FATP complexes, or bind first to CD36 which then
releases the PUFA to FATP. Considerable amounts
of CD36 mRNA were observed in healthy intestinal
biopsies (Heimerl, 2006). A study with CD36-
deficient mice suggested only a minor role for CD36
in the lipid absorption in enterocytes (Goudriaan et
al., 2002).
The cytoplasmic protein FABP binds PUFA
inside the cell for further fatty acid metabolism. Only
three of the seven FABP members described to
date (FABP1, FABP2 and FABP6) have major roles
in the intestinal tissue. High mRNA levels have been
detected in ileum (FABP1, FABP2 and FABP6) and
colon (FABP1 and FABP2) biopsies.The expression
of FABP2 and FABP6 genes was down-regulated in
colon of UC patients (Heimerl et al., 2006). FABP
has also been considered as a plasma marker of
intestinal injury in patients with UC, as the serum
concentration of intestinal FABP was elevated in
these patients and may indicate ileitis (WiercinskaDrapalo, 2008).
For the next step in fatty acid metabolism,
acetylation of long chain fatty acids by ACSL is
required. ACSL are integral membrane proteins
with active sites facing the cytosol. Five human
ACSL genes and several isoforms have been
identified (Heimerl et al., 2006; Soupene and
Kuypers, 2008). mRNA levels of ACSL1 and ACSL4
were found to be increased in ileum and colon of
IBD patients. The ACSL1 and ACSL4 isoforms
provide acyl-CoA for the synthesis of triacylglycerol
and phospholipid; the latter of which might be
incorporated into the intestinal membrane to
maintain epithelial barrier function. Therefore, an
up-regulation of some ACSL members by the fatty
acids present in the enterocyte could support
membrane integrity and decelerate the course of
inflammation in IBD (Heimerl et al., 2006).
Inside the cytoplasm, fatty acids can be
elongated and desaturated by specific elongases
and desaturases, -oxidized in mitochondria or
peroxisomes for energy production, -oxidized in
microsomes, peroxidized, involved in membrane
phospholipid or eicosanoid (PG, LT and TX)
synthesis (Dulpus et al., 2000). PUFA are able to
down-regulate the expression of genes for enzymes
involved in fatty acid synthesis, including acetylCoA carboxylase, fatty acid synthase and stearoylCoA desaturase (Salter and Tarling, 2007).
12 GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508
BIANCA KNOCH, MATTHEW P.G. BARNETT, NICOLE C. ROY AND WARREN C. MCNABB
3.2. Transcription factors
Dietary PUFA can also directly regulate gene
expression by interaction with transcription factors
to exert their effects on various metabolic states in
health and disease (Salter and Tarling, 2007).
Transcription factors play an important role in IBD
(Heimerl et al., 2006; Sanderson et al., 2008),
for example NFB in regulating production
and activation of pro-inflammatory cytokines
(Mitsuyama et al., 2001). Nuclear receptors, a
family of ligand-activated transcription factors, are
most relevant in mediating the effect of nutrients
and their metabolites on gene transcription (De
Vogel-van den Bosch, 2008) and can directly or
indirectly regulate genes of lipid metabolism and
inflammatory signalling (Schmitz and Ecker, 2008).
Nuclear receptors that regulate PUFA-induced
gene expression include peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptors (PPAR, NR1C), liver X receptor
(LXR, NR1H), retinoid X receptor (RXR, NR2B),
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4), farnesoid X
receptor (FXR, NR1H) and pregnane X receptor
(PXR, NR1I) (Heimerl et al., 2006; Salter and Tarling,
2007; Sanderson et al., 2008). Transcriptional
regulation by these nuclear receptors requires
heterodimerization with RXR. Receptors that also
mediate effects of dietary fatty acids on gene
expression include the transcription factors SREBP1
and NFB (Sanderson et al., 2008). The interaction
of PUFA with all of these transcription factors in the
regulation of fatty acid metabolism genes is still illdefined in vivo.
PPAR can be activated by a range of natural
and synthetic compounds, including fibrates,
xenobiotics, and both saturated and unsaturated
fatty acids (Salter and Tarling, 2007). PPAR
isoforms, which belong to the steroid hormone
nuclear receptor superfamily of ligand-activated
transcription factors (which includes retinoic acid
receptor (RAR), LXR and RXR), are particularly
relevant to dietary fatty acid effects on gene
expression. Three different isoforms of PPAR
(PPAR (NR1C1), PPAR (also known as )
(NR1C2), and PPAR (NR1C3)) have been
characterized (Sampath and Ntambi, 2005; Bünger
et al., 2007).
N-3 and n-6 PUFA serve as endogenous ligands
for all PPAR isoforms with varying affinity for the
receptor subtypes (Salter and Tarling, 2007).
Furthermore, transactivation and competitive
binding assays have revealed that PUFA
metabolites, such as the naturally occurring
eicosanoids, can also activate PPAR isoforms with
greater affinity than their parent compounds
(Sampath and Ntambi, 2005). N-3 PUFA are more
potent activators of PPAR than n-6 PUFA. After
activation by a ligand, PPAR dimerize with RXR and
the PPAR/RXR heterodimer binds to DNA response
elements, called the PPAR response element, in
the promoter of target genes (Sampath and Ntambi,
2005; Salter and Tarling, 2007).
PPAR is the main PPAR isoform involved in
regulation of genes of lipid and carbohydrate
metabolism in hepatocytes (Sampath and Ntambi,
2005). PPAR has been shown to be highly
expressed in the small intestine (Bünger et al.,
2007). PPAR is also expressed in kidney, whereas
PPAR (subforms 1, 2 and 3 arising from
alternative splicing of one gene) is mainly
expressed in adipose tissue and macrophages
(Salter and Tarling, 2007). PPAR is ubiquitously
expressed (Salter and Tarling, 2007). PPAR is
associated with transcriptional up-regulation of the
expression of genes involved in fatty acid oxidation
and lipoprotein metabolism, including acyl-CoA
oxidase, FATP, carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1,
lipoprotein lipase and apolipoproteins AI and CIII.
PPAR inhibits the expression of genes encoding
for pro-inflammatory proteins, including vascular
cell adhesion molecule 1 (a membrane protein that
mediates leukocyte extravasion to sites of tissue
inflammation (Wu, 2007)) and interleukin 6, in the
vascular endothelium (Salter and Tarling, 2007).
There is some evidence that PUFA inhibit lipogenic
gene expression by repression of SREBP mRNA
(Sampath and Ntambi, 2005).
SREBP belong to the membrane-bound
members of the basic helix–loop–helix leucine
zipper family of transcription factors that were
first characterized by binding to a sterol
response element found on genes involved in
cholesterolgenesis. Three isoforms of SREBP have
been identified; SREBP1a and 1c, which regulate
the expression of genes involved in fatty acid and
cholesterol synthesis pathways, and SREBP2,
which controls genes important for cholesterol
homeostasis (Sampath and Ntambi, 2005; Salter
and Tarling, 2007). The inactive precursor form of
SREBP is located in the endoplasmic reticulum,
linked to SREBP cleavage-activating protein
(SCAP). With low sterol concentrations in the cell,
SCAP moves with the SREBP to the Golgi
apparatus where the active mature form of SREBP
is released. The mature SREBP migrates to the
nucleus and can bind to the sterol response
element in the promoter region of target genes
involved in cholesterol, triglyceride and fatty acid
synthesis. When cellular sterol concentrations are
high, sterol interacts with the protein Insig, an
endoplasmic reticulum anchor protein, on the
SREBP-SCAP complex and SREBP maturation is
inhibited. As a consequence the transcription of
target genes involved in lipid and lipoprotein
metabolism is down-regulated (Sampath and
Ntambi, 2005; Salter and Tarling, 2007).
SREBP1 expression is mainly regulated at the
level of gene transcription, whereas SREBP2
expression is mainly regulated at a posttranslational level, through modulation of cleavage
of its membrane-bound precursor to release the
active nuclear form (Salter and Tarling, 2007). As
reviewed by these authors, PUFA regulate SREBP
expression partly through LXR. PUFA can inhibit
GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508 13
STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF DIETARY POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS: MOLECULAR MECHANISMS INVOLVED...
the interaction of oxysterol ligands with LXR and
thus inhibit activation of SREBP1c gene
transcription by LXR. Another possible mechanism
is the inhibition of LXR transcriptional activity by
PUFA activation of PPAR. Increased competition
between PPAR and LXR for the connection with its
transcriptional partner RXR has been reported
(Salter and Tarling, 2007). The effect of dietary
PUFA on cell lipid homeostasis is a result of
complex, controlled interactions between SREBP,
PPAR, LXR and RXR transcription factors
(Sampath and Ntambi, 2005; Deckelbaum et al.,
2006; Salter and Tarling, 2007). An overview of
PUFA and its influence on transcription factors is
presented in Figure 2.
There is also evidence that n-3 PUFA affect
HNF4 transcriptional activity and exert
hypotriglyceridemic effects. The HNF4 gene is
highly expressed in liver, but is also found in kidney,
intestine and pancreas. This transcription factor is
associated with the expression of genes involved
in lipid and lipoprotein metabolism, such as
apolipoproteins AII, AIV, CII and CIII, the microsomal
triglyceride transfer protein, and cytochrome P450,
family 7, subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (CYP7A1).
HNF4 binds with high affinity to unsaturated longchain fatty acyl CoA which in turn inhibits HNF-4a
transcriptional activity. HNF4 binds to direct repeat
1 response elements as a homodimer and can
compete with PPAR/RXR heterodimers for DNA
binding (Salter and Tarling, 2007).
Another mechanism of PUFA-mediated gene
expression is the regulation of the transcription
factor NFB. NFB and Inhibitor B (IB) are colocated in the cytoplasm of cells as an inactive
heterodimer. When IB is phosphorylated, NFB
separates from IB and translocates to the nucleus
to influence the transcription of a variety of proinflammatory genes, such as COX2 and IL6. AA
stimulates NFB translocation and thus induces
NFB target gene transcription, whereas EPA
inhibits translocation by PPAR-mediated
activation, resulting in inhibition of the transcription
of NFB target genes (Sampath and Ntambi, 2005).
4. A MOLECULAR APPROACH TO STUDY
POLYUNSATURATED FATTY
ACID-REGULATED GENES IN INTESTINAL
INFLAMMATION
An approach to define the molecular
mechanisms whereby dietary PUFA alter intestinal
inflammation is to identify PUFA-regulated genes
14 GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508
BIANCA KNOCH, MATTHEW P.G. BARNETT, NICOLE C. ROY AND WARREN C. MCNABB
PUFA
Acyl-CoA
RXR
FXR
LXR
+/-
SREBP1
NFκB
κB
L-FABP
Fattyacid
oxidation
Thermogenesis
Fattyacid,
Cholesterol
synthesis
Inflammation
HNF4
RXR
FXR
LXR
SREBP1
NFκB
L-FABP
HNF4
PPARα
Figure 2
Transcription factors influenced by PUFA. PUFA can activate (PPAR, RXR and FXR) or repress (SREBP1, LXR and NFB)
various transcription factors. L-FABP as PPAR-binding protein can transport and deliver PUFA to PPAR. HNF4 transactivation
is repressed by PUFA and activated by PUFA-CoA ester. RXR is the dimerization partner for PPAR, LXR and FXR and represents
a PUFA-binding protein.
PPAR, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor ; RXR, retinoid X receptor; FXR, farnesoid X receptor; SREBP1, sterol regulatory
element binding protein 1; LXR, liver X receptor; NFB, nuclear factor-B; L-FABP, liver fatty acid binding protein; HNF4, hepatic
nuclear factor 4 (created from information in Schmitz and Ecker, 2008 and Dulpus et al., 2002).
that are expressed at the onset of intestinal
inflammation.
Methods for gene expression analysis that
require the pre-selection of single genes, such as
Northern blotting and quantitative PCR, are biased.
These methods have been and are still useful, but
they miss important effects on biological processes,
such as metabolic and signalling pathways and
transcriptional networks across several pathways
(Subramanian et al., 2005).
DNA and oligonucleotide microarray
technologies enable the analysis of genome-wide
expression patterns (e.g. for particular diseases or
physiological states) of organisms with a
sequenced genome, allowing investigators to
establish gene networks and identify new genes
involved in the investigated trait. Gene expression
profiling, or transcriptomics, is widely used in both
biomedical (Subramanian et al., 2005) and nutrition
(Müller and Kersten, 2003) research to characterize
molecular- pathway and network data in a variety of
tissues in laboratory animals (Langmann et al.,
2004; Rivera et al., 2006; Dommels et al., 2007) and
in response to dietary treatments to predict a
phenotypic outcome (De Vogel-van den Bosch et
al., 2008; Nones et al., 2008; Sanderson et al.,
2008).
However, extracting the biological significance of
a large amount of gene data is still a challenge.
Information about genes is organized in ontologies,
such as Gene Ontology (Prüfer et al., 2007). There
are several tools for gene ontology enrichment
analysis (Ingenuity pathway analysis or IPA,
FUNC and many others) available to help
interpret the extensive gene lists generated using
transcriptomics.
IPA software has a manually created knowledge
base and combines gene ontology enrichment with
pathway enrichment analysis, network construction
and comparison analysis. The biological interaction
networks in IPA identify nodes (hub genes) that are
central in connections between the differentially
expressed genes. FUNC is also a useful tool to
analyze large-scale gene expression data in the
context of functional annotations (Prüfer et al.,
2007). The disadvantage of the FUNC approach
compared to that of IPA is that it does not
incorporate a function or pathway analysis and
lacks a disease focus.
Hub genes are validated by quantitative realtime PCR to confirm their expression as seen in
microarrays. More importantly, their function and
possible target genes can be further investigated
through cell-based transactivation assays.
4.1. Animal models of IBD
Several in vitro studies have been carried out to
investigate the effect of essential fatty acids on
various cell cultures (Grammatikos et al., 1994).
The current in vitro models are useful for screening
food components, but they are unable to mimic the
complexity of the intestinal tract. Thus in vivo
models of IBD are important for unravelling the
complex interactions between food, intestinal
bacteria and intestinal cells and thus elucidating the
mechanisms of initiation and progression of
intestinal inflammation.
Many different animal models to study intestinal
inflammation are available, including gene knockout
or defect, transgenic, spontaneous colitis, inducible
colitis and adoptive transfer models (Jurjus et al.,
2004). These animal models display some of the
key characteristics of intestinal inflammation (such
as morphological changes, inflammation status and
onset and progression of disease pathophysiology)
and have a well-defined genetic background and
immune system.
The animal models that have been widely used,
and which will be covered in this review, are inducible
colitis (chemicals, pathogenic bacteria) and genetic
rodent models. Chemicals that are used to induce
acute intestinal colitis include dextran sodium
sulphate (DSS) and 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic
acid (TNBS) (Jurjus et al., 2004). Two examples of
pathogenic bacteria that can induce intestinal lesions
are enteroinvasive Escherichia coli or Salmonella
typhimurium (Gill et al., 2001). The parameters
commonly monitored in chemically- and pathogenic
bacteria-induced colitis models are histological
lesions and biochemical parameters such as
myeloperoxidase activity, glutathione concentration
and cytokine profiles.
Genetic mouse models with certain gene
mutations and deficiencies such as the interleukin
10 gene deficient (IL10-/-) mouse (Kühn et al., 1993;
Roy et al., 2007) and the multidrug resistance gene
deficient (mdr1a-/-) mouse (Dommels et al., 2007)
show chronic and spontaneous intestinal
inflammation. Some of these models which are
commercially available have a single gene defect to
induce a human IBD-like colitis. IL10 is an antiinflammatory cytokine and an IL10 gene defect
causes an imbalance in the inflammatory
responses. It has been reported that IL10-/- mice
(C57BL/6J/129-Ola background) develop a Crohn’s
disease-like colitis by 12 weeks of age when raised
under conventional conditions (Berget et al., 1996).
The level of inflammation seen in IL10-/- mice varies
depending on the genetic background; intestinal
lesions are least severe in the C57BL/6J strain
(Berg et al., 1996). Thus, to induce a more
consistent intestinal inflammation, IL10-/- mice can
be inoculated with Enterococcus faecalis (Balish
and Warner, 2002) or pure Enterococcus isolates
(E. faecalis and E. faecium) combined with a mixed
“complex intestinal flora” derived from healthy
C57BL/6J mice raised under conventional
conditions (Roy et al., 2007). The exact mechanism
of IBD pathogenesis, both in animal models and in
humans, is still unclear. An inappropriate T helper 1
(Th1) response to antigens of the normal intestinal
flora has been suggested due to the lack of IL10
that normally down-regulates such T cell reactivity
(Kühn et al., 1993; Berg et al., 1996).
GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508 15
STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF DIETARY POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS: MOLECULAR MECHANISMS INVOLVED...
Despite the IBD-like symptoms that develop in
IL10-/- mice, IL10 gene variants have not
consistently been found in IBD patients, whereas
variants of the IL23 receptor have been, e.g., in the
New Zealand population (Roberts et al., 2007). IL23
has been shown to regulate T cell-mediated colitis
in the IL10-/- mice (Yen et al., 2006). The most
common human IBD susceptibility gene is NOD2
(Ferguson et al., 2007, Torres and Ríos, 2008), and
one common variant in this gene is a C insertion
at position 3020, which leads to a truncated
gene product (NOD233). The NOD233 mouse
develops colon inflammation and ulceration in
response to microbial invasion (Maeda et al, 2005),
because of a failure to differentiate between existing
intestinal flora and invading bacteria.
4.2. Inflammatory lesions and mediator
production
In this section, results from studies using animal
models of IBD fed diets supplemented with PUFA
are discussed, with particular emphasis on
inflammatory lesion development as evaluated by
histology, immunohistochemistry, lipid and protein
mediator profiles and changes in intestinal gene
expression.
Reviews of studies using dietary long chain
PUFA (as fish oil) in IBD patients (Belluzzi, 2002;
Calder, 2008) have concluded some benefits of fish
oil including improvement of clinical score and gut
mucosal histology and decreased relapse. Despite
these beneficial effects of fish oil, there are also
studies that report no effect on disease activity,
higher rate of relapse or no effect on relapse with
fish oil (Calder, 2008). Overall evidence of clinical
benefits of n-3 PUFA in IBD is rather weak.
Only a few animal (Hansen Petrik et al., 2000)
and human (Shimizu et al., 2003) studies have
investigated the effects of purified PUFA in
intestinal inflammation. The study of Hansen Petrik
et al., (2000) evaluated the effect of purified AA and
EPA ethyl ester alone and in combination on
colorectal cancer using the ApcMin/+ mouse model.
EPA could reduce the number and size of tumors
associated with decreased tissue AA and
prostaglandin levels, whereas AA supplementation
to the EPA diet reduced anti-tumorigenic effect of
EPA. The study of Shimizu et al., (2003)
investigated the impact of highly purified EPA ethyl
ester given daily for 2 months to children with UC in
relapse. LTB4 production from leukocytes and colon
mucosa after 2 month of treatment was lower than
before treatment. However, there was no control
group without, so it is difficult to associate the
absence of relapses for the study period with the
EPA ethyl ester administration.
The animal studies summarized here mainly
involve chemically-induced colitis models. The
effects of dietary PUFA supplementation on disease
severity are related to the production of proinflammatory eicosanoids. Four studies have found
decreased colon or ileum damage and
inflammation compared to n-6 PUFA diet in a rat
model of chemically-induced colitis (Vilaseca et al.,
1990; Empey et al., 1991;Yuceyar et al., 1999; Nieto
et al., 2002). Vilaseca et al., (1990) compared the
effects of dietary supplementation with either
sunflower (n-6) or cod liver (n-3) oil on the
development of chronic granulomatous lesions in
the colon of a TNBS rat model. Luminal eicosanoid
levels increased after TNBS challenge in both
groups. The eicosanoids PGE2 and LTB4 production
declined after a few days, whereas the eicosanoid
TXB2 continued to rise in the n-6 diet group. In the
n-3 group the colon lesions were markedly reduced
after 30 days and inflammation, as well as
ulceration, were almost absent by 50 days. The
study concluded that the fish oil diet prevented the
TXB2 increase in the chronic stage of inflammation.
Further evidence for protective effects of a fish oil
(EPA)-enriched diet is shown by histological
improvements in colon and ileum mucosa of rats
challenged with 4% acetic acid to induce colitis
(Empey et al., 1991).
The therapeutic effects of n-3 PUFA on TNBSinduced colitis was also investigated in a rat model
of CD (Shoda et al., 1995). The rats were fed a diet
enriched with 2% n-3 PUFA-rich perilla oil and
compared to a diet enriched with 2% n-6 PUFA-rich
safflower oil. In rats from the n-3 PUFA group,
plasma LTB4 concentrations and colon damage
were reduced compared to those in the n-6
PUFA group. This study also suggested that
supplementation with 2% n-3 PUFA -linolenic acid,
the precursor of EPA and DHA, may be more
therapeutically efficient in controlling intestinal
inflammation in experimental CD than either EPA or
DHA.
In a TNBS-induced rat colitis model, the
protective role of fish oil (n-3 PUFA) (both as an
enriched diet, or administered intrarectally) was
investigated (Yuceyar et al., 1999). The n-3 PUFA
enriched diet showed a protective effect by
decreasing production of LTB4 and LTC4, and by
decreasing activity of the myeloperoxidase, an
enzyme which is stored in granules of
polymorphonuclear neutrophils and macrophages
and released into extracellular fluid in the setting of
inflammatory processes. In a study by Campos et
al., (2002), parenteral lipid emulsions enriched
with n-3 PUFA reduced diarrhea, attenuated
morphological changes and decreased colon
concentrations of inflammatory mediators in a rat
model of acetic acid-induced colitis.
Nieto et al., (2002) studied biochemical and
histological alterations in rats with TNBS-induced
ulcerative colitis fed with mono- and/or
polyunsaturated fatty acids (enriched with n-3 and
n-6 PUFA). The fish oil group showed less colon
damage, lower alkaline phosphatase and
myeloperoxidase activities and PGE2 levels
compared to the olive oil group.
Another two studies have investigated the effect
of n-3 PUFA diets on pro-inflammatory cytokine
16 GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508
BIANCA KNOCH, MATTHEW P.G. BARNETT, NICOLE C. ROY AND WARREN C. MCNABB
production (Andoh et al., 2003; Whiting et al.,
2005). In the former, the effects of n-3 and n-6
PUFA-rich diets (fed for 12 days prior to the
induction of enteritis by TNBS) on intestinal
inflammation and modulation of early responses
were evaluated in rats. Mucosal changes were more
severe and serum IL6 levels higher in rats fed the n6 PUFA diet compared with those in the n-3 PUFA
group, suggesting a possible suppression of
mucosal inflammation by blockage of mucosal IL6
secretion, but no difference was seen in the TNF
levels between the diet groups. In the latter study
(which used Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
(SCID) mice fed n-3-enriched or control diet before
colitis induction by transplantation of CD45RBhigh
T cells), the transplanted n-3 PUFA fed animals
showed reduced clinical colitis and colon
immunopathology associated with decreasing proinflammatory cytokine synthesis (TNF, IL12,
IL1). There was also reduced myeloid cell
recruitment and activation, enhanced epithelial
barrier function (epithelial ZO-1 protein, mucosal
type I collagen) and induction of the mucosal wound
healing mechanism (Whiting et al., 2005).
As is the case in human clinical trials, there are
also conflicting results from studies with fish oil or
PUFA-enriched diets using animal models of IBD.
Models of chemically-induced acute colitis have
primarily been used in these studies and have
generally shown anti-inflammatory effects of fish oil
(Hegazi et al., 2006). However, preliminary data in a
DSS-induced mouse model of colitis (Ramakers et
al., 2008) have shown that an AA-enriched (ethyl
ester oil) diet increased colon AA content, but did
not result in more colon inflammation compared
with the fish oil (EPA/DHA) and oleic acid
(sunflower seed oil) diet groups. The AA-enriched
diet even exerted protective effects in colitis
(reduced weight loss and diarrhea scores) than
observed in the other two groups.
There are also conflicting data from studies
using genetic models such as the IL10-/- mouse.
IL10-/- mice represent a model for Th1-mediated
IBD that spontaneously develop colitis (Kühn et al.,
1993). One study with IL10-/- mice found that fish oil
(n-3 PUFA-enriched) reduced colon inflammation
compared to n-6 PUFA-rich corn oil (Chapkin et al.,
2007). Another study reporting the effects of fish oil
(n-3 PUFA) and olive oil (n-9 monounsaturated fatty
acids) compared with control corn oil (n-6 PUFA) on
the severity of chronic colitis in IL10-/- mice studied
COX2 expression as a possible mediator of the
immunomodulatory effects of dietary fatty acids on
chronic colitis (Hegazi et al., 2006). The fish oil diet,
however, increased chronic colitis in the colon,
and had inhibitory effects on intestinal COX2
expression. Inhibition of COX2 expression results
in decreased production of anti-inflammatory
eicosanoids, e.g. PGE2.
The pathogenesis of chemically induced colitis
may be different compared to genetically induced
colitis. Furthermore, the development of colitis in
IL10-/- mice is in some studies dependent on the
presence of commensal luminal bacteria. In
particular, inoculation with pure isolates of
Enterococcus species, either in isolation (Balish
and Warner, 2002), or combined with a mixed
“complex intestinal flora” derived from healthy
control mice (Roy et al., 2007) appears to play a
critical role in establishing consistent inflammation
in the intestinal mucosa. It may be that some of the
conflicting data in genetic mouse models could be
due to variations in bacterial colonization of the
gastrointestinal tract. Additional studies are
therefore warranted to investigate the mechanisms
of PUFA on intestinal bacteria, e.g. PUFA can affect
mucosal adhesion sites for intestinal bacteria,
and better characterize the role of bacteria in
inflammation using genetic animal models of colitis.
The findings from previous rodent studies
examining the effectiveness of n-3 and n-6 PUFA
are inconsistent or conflicting. The discrepancy may
be caused by confounding factors of the diet or
PUFA supplements. Variation can arise from the
study design, diets and feeding procedures,
including impurity or unwanted oil components,
flavour, sensitivity to oxidation, diet storage,
duration of diet change etc., which can affect the n6/n-3 fatty acid ratio (Hudert et al., 2006).
Furthermore, because of the disparity in results
from both chemically induced and genetic models
of colitis, it is clear that further studies are
necessary to elucidate differential effects of fatty
acids on the time-course of colitis development.
4.3. Intestinal gene expression
Molecular targets for the protective actions of n3 and/or n-6 PUFA on experimental IBD models are
yet to be elucidated. Only a few studies have
investigated intestinal gene expression changes
after PUFA supplementation in animal models of
IBD using single gene approaches. Studies of the
molecular mechanism underlying the PUFA effect
from human studies are also lacking.
Caplan et al., (2001) found a reduction of
necrotizing enterocolitis and intestinal inflammation
in a neonatal rat model stressed with asphyxia
(increases susceptibility to necrotizing enterocolitis)
and fed with PUFA formula containing AA and DHA.
This study also revealed that PUFA reduced the
intestinal mRNA expression of the platelet activating
factor (PAF)-synthesizing enzyme PLA2 and the PAF
receptor, a marker of intestinal inflammation. In
similar studies, PUFA supplementation reduced
the incidence of necrotizing enterocolitis and also
inhibited intestinal PAF receptor and TLR4 gene
expression compared with the controls in a rat
model.The rats were fed AA/DHA, egg phospholipids
or DHA only. All PUFA supplementations downregulated PAF receptor expression in ileum and
colon, suggesting an interaction between the PAF
receptor and TLR signalling as a possible
mechanism for the protective effect of PUFA on
intestinal injury (Lu et al., 2007).
GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508 17
STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF DIETARY POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS: MOLECULAR MECHANISMS INVOLVED...
The effect of conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) and
n-3 PUFA alone and in combination to prevent or
ameliorate IBD in a pig model of DSS-induced colitis
has been evaluated (Bassaganya-Riera and
Hontecillas, 2006). Feeding CLA to the pigs delayed
the onset of IBD, with less severe colitis and
attenuated growth suppression which correlated with
induction of colon PPAR, over-expression of
PPAR-coactivator-1 and down-regulation of TNF.
n-3 PUFA supplementation alone or in a mixture with
CLA resulted in an early disease onset because
of a marked induction of the PPAR-response
gene uncoupling protein 3. CLA and n-3 PUFA
synergistically up-regulated colon keratinocyte
growth factor expression but n-3 PUFA blocked CLAinduced PPAR activation. In this pig study n-3 PUFA
failed to protect from IBD but accelerated colon
regeneration and clinical remission by activating
PPAR.
Another group has studied n-3 PUFA-derived
lipid mediators in the fat-1 transgenic mouse with
DSS-induced colitis (Hudert et al., 2006). These
mice express the Caenorhabditis elegans fat-1
gene encoding an n-3 fatty acid desaturase and
thus are able to produce n-3 PUFA from n-6 PUFA.
These mice had lower colon inflammation than wildtype mice, and this was associated with changes in
n-3-derived anti-inflammatory mediators and a
decrease in expression of genes involved in colon
inflammation (NFB, TNF, inducible NO synthase
and IL1). Increased mRNA levels for genes
important to membrane integrity, such as trefoil
factor 3, the intercellular tight junction protein
zonula occludens 1 and Toll-interacting protein (an
inhibitor of the Toll-like receptor pathway mediating
inflammatory response) were also observed.
5. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
PERSPECTIVES
This review describes the complex interactions
between dietary PUFA, inflammatory and immune
responses and regulation of gene expression in
order to provide an overview of the multi-factorial
aetiology of IBD.
Many studies have focused on the antiinflammatory effects of n-3 PUFA as indicated by
reports of histological assessments, circulating PUFA
concentrations or ex vivo production of inflammatory
mediators. A range of animal models of acute
chemically-induced colitis show primarily antiinflammatory effects of fish oil rich in n-3 PUFA. The
increased colitis associated with dietary fish oil
suggests that the pathogenesis of spontaneous colitis
may be different to chemically-induced colitis. Most of
the animal studies reviewed here provided higher fat
diets (10% or more) compared to a normal laboratory
rodent diet with 5% fat, and the use of fish oil means
there was a mixture of various fatty acids present in
these diets. Thus, any observed anti-inflammatory or
immunomodulatory effects have been assigned to a
fatty acid mix rather than pure PUFA.
Few animal studies of IBD have applied
genome-wide expression profiling to define the
molecular mechanisms underlying the diseasephenotype when PUFA diets are fed. Genome-wide
studies use modern technologies and knowledge
derived from the human genome project to provide
a more comprehensive understanding of the
multiple pathways by which PUFA can regulate
transcriptional and metabolic processes.
A large part of the evidence regarding antiinflammatory and immunomodulatory effects of
PUFA has arisen from cell culture studies where
single fatty acids have been added. In order to
define effects of dietary PUFA on IBD, animal model
systems with diets of well defined fatty acid
composition and purity would be advantageous.
These studies should incorporate the “omics”
tools (transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics)
available to nutrition research. Translating these
complex results represents a major challenge
for nutrigenomics research. The genome-wide
approach generates a huge amount of data with the
potential to explore the biological importance of
genes even beyond statistical significance. Once
hub genes that are differentially expressed in
response to PUFA have been identified by
transcriptome analyses, other techniques (including
chromatin immunoprecipitation and transactivation
assays) can be applied in order to define direct
targets of the PUFA-responding central genes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr Mark
McCann (AgResearch) for proof-reading the
manuscript.
REFERENCES
Andoh A, Tsujikawa T, Ishizuka I, Araki Y, Sasaki M,
Koyama S, Fujiyama Y. 2003. N-3 fatty acid-rich diet
prevents early response of interleukin-6 elevation in
trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced enteritis. Int. J.
Mol. Med. 12, 721-725.
Balish E, Warner T. 2002. Enterococcus faecalis induces
inflammatory bowel disease in interleukin-10
knockout mice. Am. J. Pathol. 160, 2253-2257.
Bannenberg G, Arita M, Serhan CN. 2007. Endogenous
receptor agonists: resolving inflammation. The
Scientific World Journal 7, 1440-1462.
Bassaganya-Riera, J, Hontecillas R. 2006. CLA and n-3
PUFA differentially modulate clinical activity and
colonic PPAR-responsive gene expression in a pig
model of experimental IBD. Clin. Nutr. 25, 454-465.
Belluzzi A. 2002. N-3 Fatty acids for the treatment of
inflammatory bowel disease. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 61, 391-
395.
Berg DJ, Davidson N, Kühn R, Müller W, Menon S,
Holland G, Thompson-Snipes L, Leach MW, Rennick
D. 1996. Enterocolitis and colon cancer in interleukin10-deficient mice are associated with aberrant
cytokine production and CD4+ TH1-like responses. J.
Clin. Invest. 98, 1010-1020.
18 GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508
BIANCA KNOCH, MATTHEW P.G. BARNETT, NICOLE C. ROY AND WARREN C. MCNABB
Bünger M, Van Den Bosch HM, Van Der Meijde J, Kersten
S, Hooiveld G, Müller M. 2007. Genome-wide analysis
of PPAR alpha activation in murine small intestine.
Physiol. Genomics 30, 192-204.
Calder PC. 2003. N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and
inflammation: From molecular biology to the clinic.
Lipids 38, 343-352.
Calder PC. 2006. N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids,
inflammation, and inflammatory diseases. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr. 83, 1505S-1519S.
Calder PC. 2008. Polyunsaturated fatty acids,
inflammatory processes and inflammatory bowel
diseases. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 52, 885-897.
Campos FG, Waitzberg DL, Habr-Gama A, Logullo AF,
Noronha IL, Jancar S, Torrinhas RSM, Furst P. 2002.
Impact of parenteral n-3 fatty acids on experimental
acute colitis. Brit. J. Nutr. 87, S83-S88.
Caplan MS, Russell T, Xiao Y, Amer M, Kaup S, Jilling, T.
2001. Effect of polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA)
supplementation on intestinal inflammation and
necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) in a neonatal rat
model. Pediatr. Res. 49, 647-652.
Chapkin RS, Davidson LA, Ly L, Weeks BR, Lupton JR,
McMurray DN. 2007. Immunomodulatory effects of (n3) fatty acids: Putative link to inflammation and colon
cancer. J. Nutr. 137, 200S-204S.
De Vogel-Van Den Bosch HM, Bünger M, De Groot PJ,
Bosch-Vermeulen H, Hooiveld GJEJ, Müller M. 2008.
PPARalpha-mediated effects of dietary lipids on
intestinal barrier gene expression. BMC Genomics 9,
231.
Deckelbaum RJ, Worgall TS, Seo T. 2006. N-3 fatty acids
and gene expression. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 83, 1520S1525S.
Dommels YEM, Alink GM, Van Bladeren PJ, Van Ommen
B. 2002. Dietary n-6 and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids and colorectal carcinogenesis: results from
cultured colon cells, animal models and human
studies. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 12, 233-244.
Dommels EM, Butts CA, Zhu S, Davy M, Martell S,
Hedderley D, Barnett MPG, McNabb WC, Roy NC.
2007. Characterization of intestinal inflammation and
identification of related gene expression changes in
mdr1a-/- mice. Genes Nutr. 2, 209-223.
Dulpus E, Glorian M, Forest C. 2000. Fatty acid regulation
of gene transcription. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 30749-
30752.
Empey LR, Jewell LD, Garg ML, Thomson AB, Clandidin
MT, Fedorak RN. 1991. Fish-oil enriched diet is
mucosal protective against acetic acid-induced colitis
in rats Can. J. Physiol. Pharm. 69, 480-487.
Ewaschuk JB, Dieleman LA. 2006. Probiotics and
prebiotics in chronic inflammatory bowel diseases.
World J. Gastroenterol. 12, 5941-5950.
Favier C, Neut C, Mizon C, Cortot A, Colombel JF, Mizon
J. 1997. Fecal beta-D-galactosidase production and
Bifidobacteria are decreased in Crohn’s disease. Dig.
Dis. Sci. 42, 817-822.
Ferguson LR, Shelling AN, Browning BL, Huebner C,
Petermann I. 2007. Genes, diet and inflammatory
bowel disease. Mutat. Res. 622, 70-83.
Geerling BJ, Van Houwelingen AC, Badart-Smook A,
Stockbrugger RW, Brummer JM. 1999. Fat intake and
fatty acid profile in plasma phospholipids and adipose
tissue in patients with Crohn’s disease, compared
with controls. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 94, 410-417.
Gill HS, Shu Q, Lin H, Rutherfurd KJ, Cross ML. 2001.
Protection against translocating Salmonella
typhimurium infection in mice by feeding the immunoenhancing probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain
HN001. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. 190, 97-104.
Goodwin JS, Ceuppens J. 1983. Regulation of the
immune-response by prostaglandins. J. Clin. Immunol
3, 295-315.
Goudriaan JR, Dahlmans VEH, Febbraio M, Teusink B,
Romijn JA, Havekes LM, Voshol PJ. 2002. Intestinal
lipid absorption is not affected in CD36 deficient mice.
Mol. Cell. Biochem. 239, 199-202.
Grammatikos SI, Subbaiah PV, Victor TA, Miller WM.
1994. Diverse effects of essential (n-6 and n-3) fatty
acids on cultured cells. Cytotechnology 15, 31-50.
Hansen Petrik MB, McEntee MF, Chiu CH, Whelan J.
2000. Antagonism of arachidonic acid is linked to the
antitumorigenic effect of dietary eicosapentaenoic
acid in ApcMin/+ mice. J. Nutr. 130, 1153-1158.
Hegazi RAF, Saad RS, Mady H, Matarese LE, O’keefe S,
Kandil HM. 2006. Dietary fatty acids modulate chronic
colitis, colitis-associated colon neoplasia and COX-2
expression in IL-10 knockout mice. Nutrition 22, 275-
282.
Heimerl S, Moehle C, Zahn A, Boettcher A, Stremmel W,
Langmann T, Schmitz G. 2006. Alterations in intestinal
fatty acid metabolism in inflammatory bowel disease.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta-Mol. Basis Dis. 1762, 341-
350.
Hudert CA, Weylandt KH, Lu Y, Wang JD, Hong S,
Dignass A, Serhan CN, Kang JX. 2006. Transgenic
mice rich in endogenous omega-3 fatty acids are
protected from colitis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
103, 11276-11281.
Jurjus AR, Khoury NH, Reimund JM. 2004. Animal
models of inflammatory bowel disease. J. Pharmacol.
Toxicol. Methods 50, 81-92.
Kankaanpää PE, Salminen SJ, Isolauri E, Lee YK. 2001.
The influence of polyunsaturated fatty acids on
probiotic growth and adhesion. FEMS Microbiol. Lett.
194, 149-153.
Kühn R, Löhler J, Rennick D, Rajewsky K, Müller W.
1993. Interleukin-10-deficient mice develop chronic
enterocolitis. Cell 75, 263-274.
Kuroki F, Iida M, Matsumoto T, Aoyagi K, Kanamoto K,
Fujishima M. 1997. Serum n-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids are depleted in Crohn’s disease. Dig. Dis. Sci.
42, 1137-1141.
Kussmann M, Raymond F, Affolter M. 2006. OMICSdriven biomarker discovery in nutrition and health. J.
Biotechnol. 124, 758-787.
Langmann T, Moehle C, Mauerer R, Scharl M, Liebisch
G, Zahn A, Stremmel W, Schmitz G. 2004. Loss of
detoxification in inflammatory bowel disease:
Dysregulation of pregnane X receptor target genes.
Gastroenterol. 127, 26-40.
Lu J, Jilling T, Li D, Caplan MS. 2007. Polyunsaturated
fatty acid supplementation alters proinflammatory
gene expression and reduces the incidence of
necrotizing enterocolitis in a neonatal rat model.
Pediatr. Res. 61, 427-432.
Maeda S, Hsu LC, Liu H, Bankston LA, Iimura M, Kagnoff
MF, Eckmann L, Karin M. 2005. Nod2 mutation in
Crohn’s disease potentiates NF-kappaB activity and
IL-1beta processing. Science 307, 734-738.
Mills SC, Windsor AC, Knight SC. 2005. The potential
interactions between polyunsaturated fatty acids and
colonic inflammatory processes. Clin. Exp. Immunol
142, 216-228.
Mitsuyama K, Suzuki A, Tomiyasu N, Takaki K, Toyonaga
A, Sata M. 2001. Transcription factor-targeted
GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508 19
STUDY OF THE EFFECTS OF DIETARY POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS: MOLECULAR MECHANISMS INVOLVED...
therapies in inflammatory bowel disease. Digestion
63, 68-72.
Müller M, Kersten S. 2003. Nutrigenomics: goals and
strategies. Nat. Rev. Genet 4, 315-322.
Mutch DM, Grigorov M, Berger A, Fay LB, Roberts MA,
Watkins SM, Williamson G, German JB. 2005. An
integrative metabolism approach identifies stearoylCoA desaturase as a target for an arachidonateenriched diet. FASEB J. 19, 599-601.
Niess JH, Reinecker HC. 2006. Dendritic cells: the
commanders-in-chief of mucosal immune defenses.
Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol. 22, 354-360.
Nieto N, Torres MI, Rios A, Gil A. 2002. Dietary
polyunsaturated fatty acids improve histological and
biochemical alterations in rats with experimental
ulcerative colitis. J. Nutr. 132, 11-19.
Nones K, Dommels YEM, Martell S, Butts C, McNabb
WC, Park ZA, Zhu S, Hedderley D, Barnett MPG, Roy
NC. 2008. The effects of dietary curcumin and rutin on
colonic inflammation and gene expression in multiple
drug resistance gene-deficient (mdr1a-/-) mice, a
model of inflammatory bowel diseases. Brit. J. Nutr.
Sep2 (ahead of publication), 1-13.
Podolsky DK. 2002. Inflammatory bowel disease. N. Engl.
J. Med. 347, 417-429.
Prüfer K, Muetzel B, Do HH, Weiss G, Khaitovich P, Rahm
E, Pääbo S, Lachmann M, Enard W. 2007. FUNC: a
package for detecting significant associations
between gene sets and ontological annotations. BMC
Bioinformatics 8, 41.
Ramakers JD, Mensink RP, Verstege MI, Te Velde AA,
Plat, J. 2008. An arachidonic acid-enriched diet does
not result in more colonic inflammation as compared
with fish oil- or oleic acid-enriched diets in mice with
experimental colitis. Brit. J. Nutr. 100, 347-354.
Rivera E, Flores I, Rivera E, Appleyard CB. 2006.
Molecular profiling of a rat model of colitis: Validation
of known inflammatory genes and identification of
novel disease-associated targets. Inflamm. Bowel Dis.
12, 950-966.
Roberts RL, Gearry RB, Hollis-Moffatt JE, Miller AL, Reid
J, Abkevich V, Timms KM, Gutin A, Lanchbury JS,
Merriman TR, Barclay ML, Kennedy MA. 2007. IL23R
R381Q and ATG16L1 T300A are strongly associated
with Crohn’s disease in a study of New Zealand
Caucasians with inflammatory bowel disease. Am. J.
Gastroenterol. 102, 2754-61.
Roy N, Barnett M, Knoch B, Dommels Y, McNabb W.
2007. Nutrigenomics applied to an animal model of
inflammatory bowel diseases: Transcriptomic analysis
of the effects of eicosapentaenoic acid and
arachidonic acid-enriched diets. Mutat. Res.: Fundam.
Mol. Mech. Mutagen 622, 103-116.
Salter A, Tarling E. 2007. Regulation of gene transcription
by fatty acids. Animal 1, 1314–1320.
Sampath H, Ntambi J. M. 2005. Polyunsaturated fatty acid
regulation of genes of lipid metabolism. Annu. Rev.
Nutr. 25, 317-340.
Sanderson LM, De Groot PJ, Hooiveld GJEJ, Koppen A,
Kalkhoven E, Müller M, Kersten S. 2008. Effect of
synthetic dietary triglycerides: A novel research
paradigm for nutrigenomics. PLoS ONE 3, e1681.
Schmitz G, Ecker J. 2008. The opposing effects of n-3
and n-6 fatty acids. Prog. Lipid Res. 47, 147-155.
Sellon RK, Tonkonogy S, Schultz M, Dieleman LA,
Grenther W, Balish E, Rennick DM, Sartor RB. 1998.
Resident enteric bacteria are necessary for
development of spontaneous colitis and immune
system activation in interleukin-10-deficient mice.
Infect. Immun. 66, 5224-5231.
Serhan CN, Chiang N. 2008. Endogenous pro-resolving
and anti-inflammatory lipid mediators: a new
pharmacologic genus. Brit. J. Pharmacol. 153, S200-
S215.
Sheehan AL, Warren BF, Gear MWL, Shepherd NA.
1992. Fat-wrapping in Crohn’s disease - Pathological
basis and relevance to surgical practice. Brit. J. Surg.
79, 955-958.
Shimizu T, Fujii T, Suzuki R, Igarashi J, Ohtsuka Y, Nagata
S, Yamashiro Y. 2003. Effects of highly purified
eicosapentaenoic acid on erythrocyte fatty acid
composition and leukocyte and colonic mucosa
leukotriene B4 production in children with ulcerative
colitis. J. Pediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr. 37, 581-585.
Shoda R, Matsueda K, Yamato S, Umeda N. 1995.
Therapeutic Efficacy of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty-acid
in experimental Crohn’s disease. J. Gastroenterol. 30,
98-101.
Simopoulos AP. 2002. Omega-3 fatty acids in
inflammation and autoimmune diseases. J. Am. Coll.
Nutr. 21, 495 - 505.
Soupene E, Kuypers FA. 2008. Mammalian long-chain
Acyl-CoA synthetases. Exp. Biol. Med. 233, 507-521.
Stahl A. 2004. A current review of fatty acid transport
proteins (SLC27). Pflueg. Arch. Eur. J. Physiol 447,
722-727.
Stulnig TM. 2003. Immunomodulation by polyunsaturated
fatty acids: Mechanisms and effects. Int. Arch. Allergy
Immunol. 132, 310-321.
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S,
Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL,
Golub TR, Lander ES, Mesirov JP. 2005. Gene set
enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach
for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 102, 15545-15550.
Taurog JD, Richardson JA, Croft JT, Simmons WA, Zhou
M, Fernandezsueiro JL, Balish E, Hammer RE. 1994.
The germ-free state prevents development of gut and
joint inflammatory disease in Hla-B27 transgenic rats.
J. Exp. Med. 180, 2359-2364.
Torres MI, Ríos A. 2008. Current view of the
immunopathogenesis in inflammatory bowel disease
and its implications for therapy. World J. Gastroenterol.
14, 1972-1980.
Vilaseca J, Salas A, Guarner F, Rodriguez R, Martinez M,
Malagelada JR. 1990. Dietary fish oil reduces
progression of chronic inflammatory lesions in a rat
model of granulomatous colitis. Gut 31, 539-544.
Whiting CV, Bland PW, Tarlton JE. 2005. Dietary n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids reduce disease and
colonic proinflammatory cytokines in a mouse model
of colitis. Inflamm. Bowel Dis. 11, 340-349.
Wiercinska-Drapalo A, Jaroszewicz J, Siwak E,
Pogorzelska J, Prokopowicz D. 2008. Intestinal fatty
acid binding protein (I-FABP) as a possible biomarker
of ileitis in patients with ulcerative colitis. Regul. Pept.
147, 25-28.
Wu TC. 2007. The role of vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1 in tumor immune evasion. Cancer Res.
67, 6003-6006.
Yen D, Cheung J, Scheerens H, Poulet F, McClanahan T,
Mckenzie B, Kleinschek MA, Owyang A, Mattson J,
Blumenschein W, Murphy E, Sathe M, Cua DJ,
Kastelein RA, Rennick D. 2006. IL-23 is essential for T
cell-mediated colitis and promotes inflammation via
IL-17 and IL-6. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 1310-1316.
20 GRASAS Y ACEITES, 60 (1), ENERO-MARZO, 8-21, 2009, ISSN: 0017-3495, DOI: 10.3989/gya.086508
BIANCA KNOCH, MATTHEW P.G. BARNETT, NICOLE C. ROY AND WARREN C. MCNABB
Yuceyar H, Ozutemiz O, Huseyinov A, Saruc M, Alkanat M,
Bor S, Coker I, Batur Y. 1999. Is administration of n-3
fatty acids by mucosal enema protective against
trinitrobenzene-induced colitis in rats? Prostaglandins
Leukot. Essent. Fatty Acids 61, 339-345.