Engineered Relaxin as theranostic nanomedicine to diagnose and
ameliorate liver cirrhosis
Beata Nagórniewicz, MSca
, Deby F. Mardhian, MSca
, Richell Booijink, MSca
,
Gert Storm, PhDa,b, Jai Prakash, PhDa,1, Ruchi Bansal, PhDa,⁎, 1
a
Department of Biomaterials Science and Technology, Technical Medical Centre, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Twente, Enschede,
The Netherlands b
Department of Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Revised 17 December 2018
Abstract
Hepatic cirrhosis is a growing health problem with increasing mortality worldwide. So far, there is a lack of early diagnosis and no
clinical therapy is approved for the treatment. In this study, we developed a novel theranostic nanomedicine by targeting relaxin (RLX) that is
known to possess potent anti-fibrotic properties but simultaneously has poor pharmacokinetics and detrimental off-target effects. We
conjugated RLX to PEGylated superparamagnetic iron-oxide nanoparticles (RLX-SPIONs) and examined hepatic stellate cells (HSCs)
specific binding/uptake. Thereafter, we assessed the therapeutic efficacy of RLX-SPIONs on human HSCs in vitro and in vivo in
CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis mouse model. RLX-SPIONs showed specific binding and uptake in TGFβ-activated HSCs, and inhibited TGFβinduced HSCs differentiation, migration and contraction. In vivo, RLX-SPIONs strongly attenuated cirrhosis and showed enhanced contrast
in MR imaging. Altogether, this study presents RLX-SPIONs as a novel theranostic nanomedicine that provides new opportunities for the
diagnosis and treatment of liver cirrhosis.
© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Key words: Relaxin; Superparamagnetic iron-oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs); Hepatic stellate cells; Cirrhosis; Theranostics; Nanomedicine
Liver cirrhosis remains the growing cause of increasing
morbidity and mortality worldwide with no clinically approved
therapy.1–3 Cirrhosis is a chronic disease that develops after a
chronic injury over more than 20 years. There are two major clinical
challenges in the management of this disease; the first is the
diagnosis for monitoring the progression of the disease using noninvasive methods and the second is the therapeutic treatment which
is effective at the chronic disease stage. There are several
endogenous compounds secreted locally in nanograms and are
highly potent in inhibiting fibrogenesis, however often elicit offtarget adverse effects when administered systemically.4 Therefore,
their therapeutic applicability for the long-term treatment of chronic
diseases is not realistic. In earlier studies, we have engineered an
endogenous cytokine interferon gamma, that possess potent antiBASIC SCIENCE
Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine
17 (2019) 106– 118
nanomedjournal.com
Abbreviations: ECM, extracellular matrix; RLX, relaxin; SPIONs, superparamagnetic iron-oxide nanoparticles; RLX-SPIONs, relaxin coated
superparamagnetic iron-oxide nanoparticles; HSCs, hepatic stellate cells; CCl4, carbon tetrachloride; TGFβ, transforming growth factor beta; qRT-PCR,
quantitative reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction; Col1a1, collagen-I; Des, desmin; α-SMA, alpha smooth muscle actin; Timp1, tissue inhibitor of
matrix metalloproteases 1; MMP, matrix metalloprotease; CD, cluster of differentiation; HIF-1α, hypoxia inducing factor 1 alpha; ALT, alanine
aminotransferase; MRI, Magnetic resonance imaging.
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgments: This project was supported by the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development (ZonMW, NWO)-funded VENI
innovation grant 916.151.94 (to R.B.). Authors thank B. Klomphaar for the technical assistance during the animal experiments. We also acknowledge A. Veltien
for MRI measurements and Prof. A. Heerschap for discussion and expert opinion for MRI.
⁎Corresponding author at: Department of Biomaterials Science and Technology, University of Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands.
E-mail address: r.bansal@utwente.nl. (R. Bansal). 1 Equal contribution.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2018.12.008
1549-9634/© 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Please cite this article as: Nagórniewicz B, et al. Engineered Relaxin as theranostic nanomedicine to diagnose and ameliorate liver cirrhosis. Nanomedicine:
NBM 2019;17:106-118, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2018.12.008
fibrotic properties but with immune-related off-target effects, with a
targeting peptide and demonstrated improved therapeutic efficacy
and no off-target effects.5–7
Relaxin (RLX), an endogenous two-chain peptide hormone
structurally similar to insulin, is an anti-fibrotic hormone that has
been shown to be therapeutically effective in liver, kidney and
heart cirrhosis, and progressive systemic sclerosis.8–16 RLX binds
and activates G-protein coupled receptor, relaxin family peptide
receptor 1 (RXFP1). While RLX has emerged as a potential
therapeutic in several diseases, RLX has a very short half-life due
to small size (6KDa) and rapid renal clearance,17,18 therefore
chronic administration in fibrotic diseases i.e. continuous infusion
(via osmotic pumps) increase systemic vasodilation19 therefore
poses hindrance for the clinical translation.
Superparamagnetic iron-oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) are
promising nanoparticles with unique magnetic properties and
tailored surface chemistry that facilitated their clinical application
for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and drug targeting.20–22
SPIONs possess excellent physiochemical properties such as
magnetization with negligible remanence, colloidal stability, low
cytotoxicity, and therefore has huge potential for biomedical
applications.23,24 Recent developments of polymer (dextran/PEG)-
coated SPIONs has shown tremendous improvements in biocompatibility and blood circulation. Ferumoxide (dextran-coated
SPIONs, Ferridex) and Ferucarbotran (carboxydextran-coated
SPION, Resovist) are the two clinically approved SPIONs for
liver cancer imaging.25
In the present study, we conjugated RLX on the surface of
dextran-coated SPIONs to target to the fibrotic livers to achieve
localized anti-fibrotic efficacy with reduced off-target systemic
effects. In addition, use of SPIONs provided a great opportunity
for diagnosing cirrhosis. We first confirmed the overexpression
of RLX receptor RXFP1 in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), the key
fibrogenic cells in liver cirrhosis, in CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis
mouse model and human pathological fibrotic liver tissues. We
then conjugated RLX on SPIONs chemically at lysine present in
RLX. RLX-SPIONs were characterized and investigated for their
binding and activity in vitro in HSCs. In vivo in CCl4-induced
liver cirrhosis in mice, we examined the liver distribution of
RLX-SPIONs using MRI and investigated the therapeutic
efficacy following post-disease treatment. To our best knowledge,
this is the first study documenting a theranostic nanomedicine
based on RLX, especially to HSCs in liver, for MRI-based
diagnosis and treatment of liver cirrhosis.
Methods
Conjugation of Relaxin to SPIONs
Conjugation of Human Relaxin-2 (H2-RLX or RLX, PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ) to SPIONs (micromod Partikeltechnologie,
GmbH, Rostock, Germany) was performed using carbodiimide
chemistry (Supplementary Fig. 1). Briefly, 100 μL of SPIONs
(5 mg/ml) were activated with 10 μmol EDC (1-ethyl-3-(3-
dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide HCl, Sigma, St. Louis, MO,
USA) and 35 μmol NHS (N-hydroxysuccinimide, Sigma) prepared
in 125 μl of MES [2(-N-morpholino) ethanesulfonic acid, Sigma)]
buffer (pH 6.3). After 45 min, samples were purified with 30KDa
Amicon® Ultra Centrifugal Filters (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt,
Germany). 5 μg of RLX (0.8 nmol in 10 μl) was added to the
activated SPIONs and reacted overnight at 4 °C. Samples were
purified and unconjugated COOH groups (on SPIONs) were
reacted with glycine (Sigma) for 30 min at RT. Finally, relaxincoated SPIONs (RLX-SPIONs) were purified and stored at 4 °C.
Characterization of RLX-SPIONs
SPIONs and RLX-SPIONs size were measured by dynamic
light scattering (DLS) using Zetasizer Nano (Malvern Instruments,
UK). Conjugation efficiency of RLX on SPIONs was determined
by Dot-Blot analysis. Briefly, SPIONs, RLX and RLX-SPIONs
were serially diluted in TBS buffer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford,
IL, USA) and 5 μl of samples were spotted on the nitrocellulose
membrane and blocked for 1 h in 5% blotting-grade blocker (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) prepared in Tween®-20 TBS buffer
(TTBS; Thermo Scientific). Membrane was incubated with rat
anti-H2-RLX monoclonal antibody (1:1000; R&D Systems,
Minneapolis, MN, USA) for 1 hr. Membrane was washed in
TTBS and incubated for 1 h with secondary rabbit anti-rat
polyclonal antibody (1:1000, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) followed
by tertiary polyclonal goat-anti rabbit antibody (1:1000, Dako).
Finally, blot was developed using Pierce® ECL Plus Western
Blotting Substrate (Thermo Scientific) and imaged using
FluorChem Imaging System (ProteinSimple, Alpha Innotech,
San Leandro, CA, USA). To estimate loss of SPIONs during
conjugation process, Prussian blue iron-staining (Sigma) as per
manufacturer's instructions was performed on the dot blots. The
dots were quantified using NIH ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda,
MD) and the conjugation efficiency was calculated using the
standard curves prepared from RLX and SPIONs dots (with known
concentrations) as presented in Supplementary Fig. 2. The
conjugation efficiency as determined from the standard curves
from dot-blot and Prussian blue staining's was found to be 90% that
corresponded to three RLX peptides per SPION.
Cell lines
Human hepatic stellate cells (LX2 cells), immortalized humanderived cell line, provided by Prof. Scott Friedman (Mount Sinai
Hospital, New York, NY, USA) were cultured in DMEMGlutamax (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Lonza) and antibiotics (50 U/ml
Penicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin, Sigma). Murine NIH3T3
fibroblasts were obtained from American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and were cultured in Dulbecco's
modified Eagle's (DMEM) medium (Lonza) supplemented with
10% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma) and antibiotics.
Cell binding and uptake experiments
LX2 cells were seeded at 1 × 104 cells/well and cultured
overnight. Cells were serum-starved and incubated with TGFβ1
(Roche, Mannheim, Germany) for 24 h. TGFβ-activated LX2 cells
were incubated with SPIONs and RLX-SPIONs at RT for 2 h
(binding study) or at 37 °C for 4 h (uptake study) in with 0.5% BSA
supplemented medium. After incubation, cells were washed thrice
and were fixed with 4% formalin and stained using Prussian
Blue iron staining as per manufacturer's instructions and imaged
B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118 107
using Hamamatsu NanoZoomer Digital slide scanner 2.0HT
(Hamamatsu Photonics, Bridgewater NJ). Cellular uptake was
assessed by counting iron-positive cells/per field with which %
uptake was calculated.
3D collagen-I gel contraction assay
A collagen suspension (5 ml) containing 3 ml of collagen G1
(5 mg/ml, Matrix biosciences, Morlenbach, Germany), 0.5 ml of
10x M199 medium (Sigma), 85 μl of 1 N NaOH (Sigma) and
sterile water was mixed with 1 ml (2 × 106
) of LX2 cells. The
gel and cell suspension (0.6 ml/well) was plated in a 24-well
culture plate and was allowed to polymerize. Polymerized gels
were incubated with 1 ml of 0.5% FBS-containing medium with
or without human recombinant TGFβ (5 ng/ml) together with
1 μg/ml of RLX, RLX-SPIONs and SPIONs (equimolar
concentration), followed by detachment of the gels. The size of
the gels were digitally measured and normalized with their
respective well size in each image.
Cell migration/wound healing experiments
Cells were plated in 12-well culture plates (1 × 105 cells/well),
cultured overnight and serum-starved for 24 h. A standardized
scratch was made using a 200 μl pipette tip fixed in a holder. Cells
were then washed twice and were incubated with starvation
medium (control), or with 5 ng/ml TGFβ with and without 1 μg/ml
RLX, SPIONs and RLX-SPIONs. To measure the migration,
microscopic photographs were taken at 0 and 24 h. Images were
analyzed using NIH ImageJ software and were represented as
% wound closure relative to the control wells.
In vitro effect studies of RLX and RLX-SPIONs
Cells were seeded in 24-well plates (3 × 104 cells/well for
staining) and 12-well plates (8 × 104 cells/well for quantitative
PCR analysis and western blot analysis). Cells were serumstarved and incubated with starvation medium alone, 1 μg/ml
RLX, SPIONs and RLX-SPIONs, and 5 ng/ml TGFβ1 for 24 h.
Cells (24-well plates) were then fixed and stained for collagen I
and α-SMA (refer to Supplementary Table 1). In addition, cells
(12-well plates) were lysed either with protein lysis buffer or
RNA lysis buffer for subsequent analyses.
We also performed the in vitro effect studies with and without
serum (2%) to investigate the effect of serum on the stability of
RLX and RLX-SPIONs. Cells were seeded in 12-well plates
(8 × 104 cells/well for staining). Cells were serum-starved for
24 h after which the standardized scratches were made. The cells
were then incubated with medium (with and without serum)
alone, 1 μg/ml RLX, SPIONs and RLX-SPIONs, and 5 ng/ml
TGFβ1 for 24 h. Images were made at t = 0 h and t = 24 h to
analyze the cell migration. Images were analyzed using NIH
ImageJ software and were represented as % wound closure
relative to the control wells. Cells were lysed either with RNA
lysis buffer for subsequent analyses.
CCl4-induced advanced liver cirrhosis mouse model
All the animal experiments were performed in strict
accordance with the ethical guidelines for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals, Utrecht University, The Netherlands. Male
Balb/c mice (8–10 weeks old; n = 5 per group) were treated with
intra-peritoneal injections with olive oil or 1 ml/kg carbon
tetrachloride (CCl4, Sigma), prepared in olive oil (Sigma) twice
weekly for 8 weeks as described elsewhere.7 In the last 2 weeks,
CCl4-treated mice received intravenous administration of PBS
(n = 6), RLX (250 ng/dose, n = 6), RLX-SPIONs (250 ng/dose,
n = 6) and SPIONs (equimolar concentrations, n = 5) three
times a week (in total 6 intravenous injections). Healthy controls
(n = 5) received olive oil for 8 weeks. Finally, all the animals
were euthanized, and liver tissues, and blood samples were
collected for subsequent analysis.
Magnetic resonance imaging
For MRI, Balb/c mice with 8 weeks of CCl4 administration
were intravenously injected with 5 μg/dose RLX, RLX-SPIONs
and SPIONs (equimolar concentrations) 30 min before imaging.
MRI measurements were performed on a BioSpec Avance III
small animal MR system (Bruker BioSpin, Ettlingen, Germany)
equipped with an shielded gradient set of 600mT/m operating on
Paravision 5.1 software platform (Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany).
First gradient echo T2*-weighted images covering the entire
mouse liver were acquired in three directions for anatomical
reference using described acquisition parameters.
Immunohistochemistry and Immunofluorescence
Liver tissues were harvested and transferred to Tissue-Tek
OCT embedding medium (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA, USA)
and snap-frozen in 2-methyl butane. Cryosections (4 μm) were
air-dried and fixed with acetone for 10 min. Cells or tissue
sections were rehydrated with PBS and incubated with the
primary antibody (refer to Supplementary Table 1) followed
by incubation with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated
secondary antibody. Next, the samples were incubated with
HRP-conjugated tertiary antibody or donkey anti-goat Alexa
594-labeled tertiary antibody (Life Technologies, Gaithersburg,
MD, USA). Thereafter, peroxidase activity was developed using
the AEC (3-amino-9-ethyl carbazole) substrate kit (Life
Technologies) for 20 min, and nuclei were counterstained with
hematoxylin (Fluka Chemie, Buchs, Switzerland). For tissue
sections, endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by 3%
H2O2 prepared in methanol. Cells or sections were mounted with
Aquatex mounting medium (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) or
DAPI-containing mounting medium (Sigma). The staining was
visualized and the images were captured using light microscopy
(Nikon eclipse E600 microscope, Tokyo, Japan).
Western blot analysis
Cells were homogenized in cold RIPA buffer [with protease
inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor (Roche)] and centrifuged at
12,000 rpm for 1 h at 4 °C. The samples were subjected to SDSPAGE with 10% Tris-glycine gels (Life Technologies) followed
by transfer to PVDF membrane. The membranes were developed
according to the standard protocols using primary and secondary
antibodies as mentioned in Supplementary Table 1. The bands
were visualized using ECL detection reagent (PerkinElmer) and
photographed using FluorChem Imaging System. Intensity of
108 B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118
individual bands was quantified using NIH ImageJ software and
expressed in % relative to β-actin.
RNA extraction, reverse transcription and quantitative
real-time PCR
Total RNA from cells and liver tissues was isolated using the
GenElute Total RNA Miniprep Kit (Sigma) and SV total RNA
isolation system (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA),
respectively, according to manufacturer's instructions. The RNA
concentration was quantitated and total RNA (1 μg) was reverse
transcribed using the iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA, USA). Real-time PCR was performed using the 2x
SensiMix SYBR and Fluorescein Kit (Bioline GmbH, QT615–05,
Luckenwalde, Germany), 20 ng of cDNA and pre-tested genespecific primer sets (listed in Supplementary Tables 2 and 3)
according to manufacturer's instructions. Finally, cycle threshold
(Ct) values were normalized to the reference gene GAPDH, and
relative expression were calculated using the 2-ΔΔCt method.
RXFP1 gene expression in the human cohort from the
public database
RXFP1 gene expression was assessed in the publicly available
transcriptome datasets of liver tissue from cirrhosis patients with
Hepatitis B virus infection (n = 10 controls; n = 17 liver cirrhosis,
GSE38941) obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology
Information Gene Expression Omnibus database (GEO).
Statistical analyses
The results are expressed as the mean + standard error of the
mean. The graphs and statistical analyses were performed using
GraphPad Prism version 5.02 (GraphPad Prism, La Jolla, CA,
USA). Multiple comparisons between different groups were
performed using the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
with the Bonferroni post hoc test. P b 0.05 was considered
significant.
Results
Up-regulation of RLX receptor (RXFP1) expression in HSCs in
liver cirrhosis
In this study, we used RLX receptor as HSCs-specific target
receptor which is overexpressed on HSCs during liver cirrhosis.
Previous studies have demonstrated the hepatic expression of
RLX receptor (RXFP1) after carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and
bile-duct ligation (BDL) induced liver cirrhosis models, and in
explanted end-stage human cirrhotic livers, and in the livers from
patients with early and advanced liver cirrhosis due to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and autoimmune hepatitis
(AIH).8,26 Here, we examined RXFP1 mRNA expression in
HBV-infected liver cirrhosis patients (GSE38941). We observed
highly significant upregulation in RXFP1 mRNA expression in
patients with liver cirrhosis as compared to healthy controls
(Figure 1, A). Furthermore, we examined the RXFP1 expression
Figure 1. Up-regulation of RXFP1 in fibrotic human livers, CCl4-induced chronic liver cirrhosis in mice and TGFβ-activated hepatic stellate cells. (A) RXFP1 mRNA
expression levels from publicly available transcriptome profiling datasets. The graph depicts RXFP1 mRNA expression in liver tissues from HBV-infected liver
cirrhosis (n = 17) as compared to controls (n = 10). (B) mRNA expression of RXFP1 in the livers of olive-oil-treated control mice and CCl4-treated fibrotic mice
(8 weeks). n = 5 per group. ***P b 0.001 denotes significance versus control. (C) Collagen I- and RXFP1-stained liver sections from control livers and CCl4-treated
fibrotic mice (n = 5). (D) Gene expression of fibrotic parameters (Collagen I, α-SMA and vimentin), and (E) RXFP1 in control and TGFβ-activated LX2 cells, n = 4.
#P b 0.05 and ##P b 0.01 denotes significance versus control cells. (F) Representative images showing α-SMA and RXFP1 expression in control and TGFβactivated LX2 cells.
B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118 109
in mouse fibrotic livers as compared to healthy mouse livers. As
shown in Figure 1, B, RXFP1 expression was strongly induced
in CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis mouse model (8-weeks CCl4) as
compared to healthy controls. Repeated administration of CCl4
in mice for 8-weeks resulted in extensive cirrhosis with an
increased deposition of collagen I as shown in Figure 1, C.
Importantly, expression levels of RXFP1 were correlatively upregulated and was found to be localized in the areas of cirrhosis
(Figure 1, C). During fibrogenesis, TGFβ is one of the key
growth factor involved in disease progression by activated
fibroblasts.27,28 Therefore, we investigated the expression levels
of RXFP1 in TGFβ-activated human HSCs (LX2) as compared
to non-activated control LX2. As shown in Figure 1, D, we
observed over-expression of major HSC activation markers
(α-SMA, alpha-smooth muscle actin and vimentin) and collagen I
in TGFβ-activated LX2. Consistent with HSCs markers, RXFP1
expression was significantly upregulated in TGFβ-activated LX2
(Figure 1,E). The protein expression of RXFP1 was also found to be
significantly increased in TGFβ-activated HSCs and the expression
was correlated with α-SMA expressing HSCs (Figure 1, F).
Altogether, these results suggest the increased RXFP1 mRNA and
protein expression in liver cirrhosis patients and in activated HSCs,
and therefore suggests RXFP1 as an appropriate therapeutic and
diagnostic target.
Synthesis and characterization of relaxin-coated superparamagnetic
iron-oxide nanoparticles (RLX-SPIONs)
We conjugated RLX to COOH groups on the surface on
dextran- and PEG-coated SPIONs using carbodiimide chemistry
(Figure 2,A and Supplementary Fig. 1). Supplementary Fig. 1
depicts the step-wise reaction to conjugate RLX peptides on
COOH functionalized SPIONs. First, carboxyl groups on
SPIONs were activated by EDC to form an unstable intermediate
product EDC-activated SPIONs. Second, EDC-activated
SPIONs were stabilized by NHS followed by coupling with
RLX to form RLX-SPIONs with a stable peptide bond. As
shown in Figure 2, B, RLX conjugation was confirmed by the
increase in hydrodynamic size of SPIONs and more negative
zeta potential imparted by negatively charged RLX peptides. To
estimate conjugation efficiency, dot-blot analysis and Prussian
blue staining's were performed, and standard curves were plotted
from known concentrations (Supplementary Fig. 2). With the
standard curves, conjugation efficiency was calculated that
indicated the conjugation efficiency of about 90% which
corresponded to conjugation of approximately three RLX
peptides per SPION (Figure 2, C).
Binding and uptake of RLX-SPIONs by TGFβ-activated HSCs
As shown earlier, RXFP1 expression was significantly
upregulated on TGFβ-activated HSCs, we performed binding
and uptake studies with RLX-SPIONs and SPIONs on TGFβactivated HSCs. As shown in Figure 2, D & E, RLX-SPIONs
showed increased binding and significantly increased uptake in
TGFβ-activated LX2 as compared to unconjugated SPIONs as
confirmed by Prussian blue iron staining. RLX-SPIONs uptake
was further confirmed by fluorescent RLX staining's where
RLX and RLX-SPIONs showed similar binding to TGFβactivated LX2 (Figure 2, F). These results suggest that RLX
retained RXFP1-mediated binding and uptake following
chemical conjugation.
RLX-SPIONs inhibited fibrotic parameters in mouse 3 T3
fibroblasts in vitro
We further investigated the effects of RLX-SPIONs on
TGFβ-induced 3 T3 fibroblasts activation, migration and TGFβsignaling pathway. We first assessed the effect on fibroblasts
migration, as shown in Figure 3, A & B, RLX and RLX-SPIONs
significantly inhibited TGFβ-induced migration. Thereafter, we
examined the effect of RLX-SPIONs on fibrotic parameters and
TGFβ-signaling pathway i.e. phosphorylated SMAD2/3 pathway. We observed significant inhibition in collagen I deposition,
α-SMA expression and TGFβ signaling pathway following
incubation with RLX and RLX-SPIONs (Figure 3, C & D).
SPIONs had no significant effects on fibroblasts migration,
expression of fibrotic parameters and TGFβ-signaling pathway
(Figure 3, A–D). These results suggests that RLX retained its
anti-fibrotic activity after chemical conjugation to SPIONs.
Furthermore, RLX-SPIONs showed improved effects than RLX
suggesting increased stability of RLX following conjugation
to SPIONs.
RLX-SPIONs inhibited differentiation, migration and contractility
of human HSCs (LX2) in vitro
We then performed studies in immortalized human hepatic
stellate (LX2) cells. Following TGFβ-mediated LX2 activation,
we observed significant upregulation of collagen I and α-SMA
protein expression which was significantly inhibited by RLX and
RLX-SPIONs (Figure 4, A). Consistent with the protein
expression, gene expression of major fibrotic parameter i.e.
collagen I, and HSCs-activation marker i.e. α-SMA and TIMP1
(tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases 1) was highly induced
upon TGFβ activation and strongly reduced with RLX and RLXSPIONs (Figure 4, B). HSCs have been shown to migrate to the
sites of tissue injury during fibrogenesis and differentiate into
contractile myofibroblasts that promote liver stiffness.29 Therefore, we examined the effect of RLX and RLX-SPIONs on
migration using wound-healing/scratch assays and contractility
of LX2 cells using 3D-collagen contraction assay. We found that
RLX and RLX-SPIONs significantly inhibited TGFβ-induced
migration of LX2 cells after 24 h (Figure 4, C & D).
Furthermore, RLX and RLX-SPIONs drastically diminished
TGFβ-induced collagen gel contraction after 24, 48 and 72 h
with maximal inhibitory effects observed after 72 h (Figure 4, E
and F). Altogether, these results suggest RLX retained complete
functionality after conjugation on SPIONs.
Magnetic resonance imaging of fibrotic livers using
RLX-SPIONs
We further used RLX-SPIONs for molecular (RXFP1-based)
MR imaging in 8-week CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis in mice
(Figure 5, A). Mice were intravenously injected with SPIONs,
RLX and RLX-SPIONs 30 min before MR imaging. MRI maps
from axial sections of the upper abdomen in T2* scanning format
were made at Tr = 1500 ms and different echo time Te = 8.7 ms,
17.3 ms and 26 ms. T2* maps of the upper abdomen showed
110 B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118
significantly higher MRI contrast with RLX-SPIONs as compared
to untargeted SPIONs and control (RLX) (Figure 5, B) suggesting
increased uptake and localization of RLX-SPIONs as compared to
SPIONs. Furthermore, T2* scanning maps showed the homogenous
and uniform distribution of RLX-SPIONs in liver parenchyma.
These results demonstrate molecular MR imaging targeting RXFP1
receptor on HSCs using RLX-SPIONs as promising nanoparticles
for diagnosis of liver cirrhosis.
RLX-SPIONs ameliorated CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis in mice
We studied the therapeutic efficacy of RLX-SPIONs in 8-week
CCl4-induced advanced and established liver cirrhosis model in
vivo. This experimental model represents the clinical pathology of
human liver cirrhosis. Briefly, mice received CCl4 for 8 weeks to
induce advanced liver cirrhosis/cirrhosis. During the last 2 weeks, six
doses of vehicle, RLX, RLX-SPIONs or SPIONs were administered
Figure 2. Characterization and HSC-specific binding/uptake of RLX-SPIONs. (A) Schematic representation of RLX-SPIONs. (B) Table showing the
hydrodynamic size, polydispersity index (PDI) and zeta potential of SPIONs and RLX-SPIONs from n = 5 preparations. (C) Dot-blot analysis showing RLX
conjugation on SPIONs performed by RLX staining and SPIONs detection by Prussian blue iron staining. RLX-SPIONs, RLX and SPIONs were serially diluted
and spotted on the membrane, so the different dots in the figure represents the serial dilutions of the respective samples. (D) Representative microscopic images
showing binding and uptake of RLX-SPIONs versus SPIONs in TGFβ-activated LX2 cells. (E) Quantitative analysis depicting % cellular uptake of RLXSPIONs versus SPIONs in TGFβ-activated LX2 cells, n = 3. **P b 0.01 denotes significance versus SPIONs. (F) Representative images depicting binding of
RLX and RLX-SPIONs following relaxin staining.
B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118 111
intravenously (Figure 6,A) while continuing the CCl4 administration
which resembles the clinical treatment regimen. CCl4 mice
developed extensive bridging cirrhosis, substantial deposition of
collagen I, and increased expression of the HSC marker, desmin
(Figure 6, B). Correspondingly, mRNA expression of collagen I and
HSC markers, α-SMA and TIMP1 were highly significantly induced
in CCl4 fibrotic mice (Figure 6, C). Interestingly, RLX and more
significantly RLX-SPIONs inhibited the expression of these fibrotic
markers (Figure 6B and C). We also analyzed serum alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) levels and observed downregulation in
ALT levels with RLX-SPIONs alone while other treatment did not
influence CCl4-induced ALT levels (Supplementary Fig. 3,A). We
also measured body weights of mice before and after treatments,
and found that RLX reduced the body weight of the animals while
RLX-SPIONs improved the body weights demonstrating reduced
adverse effects (Supplementary Fig. 3,B). Notably, in line with our
in vitro data, we did not observe any effect from SPIONs alone.
Additionally, as shown earlier that RLX has effects on matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) expression and hence regulates collagen
remodeling,30 we have also analyzed influence of RLX-SPIONs
on intrahepatic MMPs (MMP2, MMP3, MMP9 and MMP13).
MMP2 and MMP13 are identified as pro-fibrotic MMPs, and
MMP3 and MMP9 are defined as anti-fibrotic MMPs.31 We found
that RLX and more strongly RLX-SPIONs inhibited pro-fibrotic
MM2 and MMP13 expression (Figure 7, A) while induced antifibrotic MMP3 and MMP9 (Supplementary Fig. 4,A,B). Altogether, these results strongly suggest that RLX-SPIONs exhibited
improved therapeutic efficacy without adverse effects.
RLX-SPIONs attenuated CCl4-induced angiogenesis and induced
intrahepatic nitric oxide signaling
Angiogenesis induced by hypoxia within an injured liver and
appears to aggravate hepatic fibrogenesis.32,33 Accordingly, we
Figure 3. Efficacy of RLX-SPIONs in TGFβ-activated murine 3 T3 fibroblasts. (A) Representative images (n = 3) depicting scratch wounds made at 0 and
wound closure at 24 h by control and TGFβ-stimulated 3 T3 fibroblasts treated with medium alone, SPIONs, RLX and RLX-SPIONs. (B) Graph showing %
wound closure after 24 h, n = 3. (C) Representative images and (D) Quantitative analysis of western blot depicting bands for α-SMA, Collagen I, pSMAD2/3,
SMAD2/3 and β-actin, performed on control and TGFβ-stimulated 3 T3 fibroblasts treated with medium alone, SPIONs, RLX and RLX-SPIONs, n = 3.
#P b 0.05, ##P b 0.01 denotes significance versus control 3 T3 cells and *P b 0.05, **P b 0.01 denotes significance versus TGFβ-treated 3 T3 fibroblasts.
112 B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118
observed significant increase in angiogenesis markers, endothelin1, CD31 and CD34, and hypoxia induced factor 1 alpha (HIF1α) in
the livers of mice chronically treated with CCl4 (Figure 7, B–D
and Supplementary Fig. 4,C). The intrahepatic expression of these
angiogenesis markers were significantly inhibited following
therapeutic treatment with RLX and more strongly with RLXSPIONs (Figure 7, B–D and Supplementary Fig. 4,C). Since RLX
has been shown to have role in portal hypertension mediated via
nitric oxide pathway,8 we also studied intrahepatic expression
of nitric oxide synthases (NOS), nitric oxide synthases regulator
cavoelin-1 and serum levels of nitrite levels and found that
RLN-SPIONs dramatically increased the expression levels of
NOS expression while decreased the expression of Caveolin-1
(Figure 7, E and F). These effects are highly significant as
compared to RLX alone suggesting strong effects of RLX-SPIONs
on portal hypertension. Notably, Endothelin-1, is also defined as
contractile agonist, was also strongly inhibited following treatment
with RLX-SPIONs (Figure 7, B) further demonstrating RLXSPIONs effects on HSCs contractility and also in amelioration of
portal hypertension.
To investigate the systemic effects of RLX-SPIONs versus
RLX, we analyzed total nitrite levels in plasma. Interestingly, we
found highly significant induction in systemic NO production
with RLX as compared to RLX-SPIONs suggesting increased
Figure 4. Efficacy of RLX-SPIONs in TGFβ-activated human HSCs (LX2). (A) Representative images (n = 3) showing Collagen I- and α-SMA-stained control and
TGFβ-activated LX2 treated with medium alone, SPIONs, RLX and RLX-SPIONs. (B) Gene expression analysis for Collagen I, α-SMA and TIMP1 as examined in
control and TGFβ-activated LX2 cells treated with medium alone, SPIONs, RLX and RLX-SPIONs, n = 3. (C) Representative images (at 0 and 24 h) and
(D) Quantitative analysis (after 24 h) of wound healing/migration by control and TGFβ-stimulated LX2 cells treated with medium alone, SPIONs, RLX and RLXSPIONs (E) Representative images (after 72 h) and (F) quantitative analysis of 3D collagen I gel contraction containing control and TGFβ-activated LX2 treated with
medium alone, SPIONs, RLX and RLX-SPIONs, n = 3. #P b 0.05 versus control HSCs; *P b 0.05 and **P b 0.01 versus TGFβ-treated HSCs.
B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118 113
systemic effects of RLX due to multiple dosing and reduced
adverse effects from RLX-SPIONs (Figure 7, H). Based on these
results, we proposed that since RLX-SPIONs demonstrated
increased liver uptake and distribution (Figure 5) and hence
showed increased expression of intrahepatic NO synthases and
exerted RLX-mediated localized effects within the fibrotic liver.
However, free unconjugated RLX induced systemic effects and
showed increased plasma nitrite levels as compared to RLXSPIONs attributed to the comparatively reduced uptake in the
liver. Altogether these results demonstrate the inhibitory effects
of RLX-SPIONs in portal hypertension with no systemic effect
on relaxant factor (NO) or vasodilation.
In vivo, we observed the improved therapeutic efficacy with
RLX-SPIONs as compared to free RLX which might be due to
(a) improved stability, (b) improved pharmacokinetics due to
longer circulation and (c) multivalent interaction of RLXSPIONs versus monovalent interaction of free RLX. Herein, we
investigated the stability of RLX-SPIONs versus free RLX in
serum in vitro. We performed the migration assay (scratch assay)
and quantitative PCR analysis whereby RLX and RLX-SPIONs
were incubated with TGFβ-activated LX2 cells in the absence
and presence of serum (Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6). We
observed that although RLX and RLX-SPIONs showed potent
inhibitory effects in vitro in the absence of serum, however, RLX
showed significantly reduced therapeutic efficacy as compared
to RLX-SPIONs in the presence of serum (Supplementary
Figs. 5 and 6), strongly suggesting the improved stability of
RLX-SPIONs and therefore, very likely, improved pharmacokinetic profile as compared to free RLX.
Discussion
We have developed a novel theranostic nanomedicine by
targeting relaxin (RLX) using SPIONs for the diagnosis and the
treatment of liver cirrhosis. We demonstrate the SPIONs-based
strategy to deliver potent therapeutic peptide hormone RLX
specifically to relaxin receptor (RXFP1), that is overexpressed
on HSCs (the key pathogenic cell types in liver), as a promising
strategy for molecular magnetic resonance imaging and targeted
therapy of liver cirrhosis. RLX-SPION showed specific binding
and uptake by HSCs since RLX receptors are specifically
overexpressed on activated HSCs during liver cirrhosis.
Furthermore, RLX-SPIONs inhibited HSCs activation, migration and contractility demonstrating the multidimensional effect
of RLX and that RLX activities were completely retained
following chemical conjugation. In vivo, in advanced and
established model of liver cirrhosis in mice, RLX-SPIONs
showed increased MRI contrast as compared to SPIONs and
increased therapeutic efficacy as compared to RLX alone.
Importantly, RLX-SPIONs strongly inhibited ECM deposition,
ECM remodeling, HSCs activation, angiogenesis and portal
Figure 5. Magnetic resonance imaging of RLX-SPIONs in vivo in CCl4-induced liver cirrhosis mouse model. (A) Regimen of liver cirrhosis induction. After
8 weeks of CCl4 injections, animals received RLX, SPIONs, RLX-SPIONs (5 μg/mice/dose) intravenously and MRI was performed after 30 min of intravenous
administration. (B) T2 contrast-enhanced MRI liver scan performed on CCl4-induced liver fibrotic mice that RLX, SPIONs, RLX-SPIONs.
114 B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118
hypertension. In contrast, RLX induced systemic adverse effects
i.e. systemic vasodilation by release of relaxant factor i.e. nitric
oxide and decreased the body weight in mice, while RLXSPIONs did not show any side effects.
RLX is composed of chain A and B joint with a linker and it
has been demonstrated that chain A is responsible for the
biological activity.34 Taking the advantage of RLX molecular
structure, we smartly conjugated one chain (chain B) of RLX to
SPIONs while the other active chain (chain A) remained free to
interact with RLX receptor. Since RLX needs to interact with the
RXFP1 receptor present on the HSCs surface for the activation of
the RLX signaling pathway and thereby inhibition of HSCs
activation, we conjugated RLX (chain B) on the surface of
SPIONs with a PEG spacer that allows RLX (chain A) to freely
Figure 6. Effects of RLX-SPIONs on cirrhosis-related parameters in CCl4-treated fibrotic mice. (A) Regimen of liver cirrhosis induction. After 6 weeks of CCl4
injections, animals received PBS (n = 6), RLX (250 ng/dose, n = 6), RLX-SPIONs (250 ng/dose, n = 6) and SPIONs (equimolar concentration as RLXSPIONs, n = 5), 3 times a week) intravenously for 2 weeks, while CCl4 injections were continued. Normal healthy controls (n = 5) received olive oil for
8 weeks. (B) Representative photomicrographs of collagen I and desmin-stained liver sections of olive oil-treated animals (normal) and fibrotic animals treated
with PBS, SPIONs, RLX and RLX-SPIONs. (C) Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of collagen I, α-SMA and TIMP1 in olive oil-treated mice (normal) and
CCl4 animals treated with PBS, SPIONs, RLX and RLX-SPIONs. Bars represent mean ± SEM, n = 5–6 mice per group. #P b 0.05 versus olive oil normal
mice; *P b 0.05, **P b 0.01 versus PBS treated-CCl4 mice.
B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118 115
bind to the receptor. It is important to comprehend that after
conjugation, such a molecule can lose its biological activity due
to conjugation at the receptor interaction site or steric hindrance
caused by the conjugation. Interestingly, we found that chain B
had 2 lysine groups and a N-terminal amine group, which we
used for conjugating RLX to SPIONs via carbodiimide
chemistry. This conjugation strategy therefore makes RLX
(chain A) accessible for binding to the receptor while having
RLX (chain B) yet bound to surface of the SPIONs. Our in vitro
effect studies confirmed that RLX-SPIONs did not lose the
activity after conjugation, and showed even better efficacy
especially in the presence of serum, where the efficacy of RLX
was significantly reduced. This might be due to increased
stability of RLX-SPIONs allowing longer duration of activity
and/or confinement of the molecules allowing better interaction
with the receptor. In addition, it is also known that multivalent
interaction instead of monovalent interaction can result in
stronger and more selective interaction.35 Therefore, multivalency and stability of RLX in RLX-SPIONs might have
contributed to the enhanced therapeutic effects.
Hepatic cirrhosis, characterized by extensive accumulation of
extracellular matrix leading to scar tissue formation in the liver
resulting in liver dysfunction and hepatocellular carcinoma.2
Activated HSCs are the key pathogenic cells responsible for the
production of abnormal fibrillar collagens in liver cirrhosis,36,37
therefore targeted therapeutics to reverse these activated HSCs are
Figure 7. Effect of RLX-SPIONs on angiogenesis, MMPs, NO bioavailability and signaling in 8-week CCl4 fibrotic mice. Hepatic mRNA expression of
(A) MMP-2 and -13; angiogenesis markers (B) Endothelin 1, (C) CD31, and (D) HIF1α; Nitric oxide pathway markers (E) NOS2 (iNOS) and (F) NOS3 (eNOS),
and (G) NOS3 regulator, Caveolin 1; and (H) Serum total nitrite levels as assessed in olive oil-treated mice (normal) and CCl4 animals treated with PBS, SPIONs,
RLX and RLX-SPIONs. Bars represent mean ± SEM, n = 5–6 mice per group. #P b 0.05, ##P b 0.01 versus olive oil normal mice; *P b 0.05, **P b 0.01
versus PBS treated-CCl4 mice.
116 B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118
of great interest. An emerging concept is the direct delivery of antifibrotics to target HSCs using receptor-specific carriers to increase
local drug concentrations while preventing deleterious effects on
non-target cells or other organs.5,6,36–38 HSCs are the major liver
cells that express RXFP1 and in light of RXFP1 overexpression
on HSCs in liver cirrhosis, previous studies have demonstrated
the therapeutic potential of RLX (6KDa, peptide hormone)
and more recently, small molecule RXFP1 agonists in liver
diseases.8,11,26,39–42 Furthermore, RLX has been implicated as potent
anti-fibrotic therapy for kidney and cardiac cirrhosis.12–15,43–48
In the liver, RLX has shown to lead to the dilation of sinusoids
and changes in the contractility of activated HSCs or myofibroblasts.49,50 In activated rat HSCs, RLX has shown to result in
a decreased collagen deposition and synthesis, accompanied by
reduced expression of TIMP1 and TIMP2.51 Several signaling
pathways have been shown to be activated by RLX in HSCs
including cAMP, cGMP, NO and Akt and have been shown to be
involved in the HSCs-specific inhibitory effects of RLX.8,52
Further studies have suggested that RLX interaction with RXFP1
receptors results in the activation of the anti-fibrotic transcription
factor PPARγ through cAMP, PKA, p38-MAPK and PPARγ
coactivator protein 1α (PGC1α).40 Promisingly, Serelaxin, a
recombinant form of human relaxin-2 (H2-RLX) relieved dyspnea,
showed improvement in clinical outcomes and reduced mortality
in acute heart failure patients in a Phase 3 trial.53 However, when
injected into patients, H2-RLX has shown to lose half of its activity
within 10 min due to the degradation by blood enzymes and
clearance by the kidney and liver.17,18 For treatment of liver
diseases, chronic administration of RLX i.e. continuous infusion
would be required due to the short half-life which would be major
obstacle for the clinical translation of RLX. To improve the halflife, systemic vasodilation, administration and for future application for magnetic resonance imaging, we synthesized RLX-coated
superparamagnetic iron-oxide nanoparticles (RLX-SPIONs). In
this study, we used dextran- and PEG-coated SPIONs, since these
hydrophilic polymers increase blood circulation time of SPIONs
and reduce non-specific interactions with macrophages and
reticuloendothelial system, and hence reduce nanotoxicity.20
Since RLX-SPIONs does not interact and phagocytosed by
macrophages and reticuloendothelial system due to the receptor
specificity (highly expressed on HSCs) and surface modification
(dextran and PEG), therefore we did not observe any response of
innate immune system in vivo. Altogether, we did not observe any
toxic effects from RLX-SPIONs in vitro and in vivo suggesting
safety profile of these nanoparticles and hence relevance for the
future clinical application.
Early and precise stage diagnosis of liver cirrhosis can be
extremely helpful in predicting the prognosis and therapeutic
outcome. In spite of advancements in the field of non-invasive
strategies, liver biopsy remain the gold standard for staging of
liver cirrhosis. Several advanced MRI techniques (diffusionweighted imaging) have been developed for accurate staging of
cirrhosis,54 however, these MRI-techniques provide indirect
measurements and can be confounded by several factors.54
Therefore, direct visualization of key pathogenic cells might be
more accurate to evaluate degree of cirrhosis. Recently,
molecular imaging has emerged to visualize, characterize and
measure the biological process at the molecular and cellular
level.55 Due to high spatial resolution and nonionizing
radiations, MRI has potential for molecular imaging. In this
study, RLX-SPIONs showed enhanced contrast and hence
demonstrates the applicability for diagnosis of liver fibrosis. In
addition, RLX-SPIONs significantly ameliorated liver fibrosis
without inducing systemic adverse effects.
To our best knowledge, this is the first study highlighting the
theranostic application of RLX and SPIONs in liver cirrhosis and
documenting increased therapeutic effects of RLX while
overcoming the adverse effects. This promising strategy should
be further trailed in other fibrotic diseases and should be
explored for the systematic evaluation of its theranostic potential
for clinical applications.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nano.2018.12.008.
References
1. Wallace MC, Friedman SL, Mann DA. Emerging and disease-specific
mechanisms of hepatic stellate cell activation. Semin Liver Dis
2015;35:107-18.
2. Bataller R, Brenner DA. Liver fibrosis. J Clin Invest 2005;115:209-18.
3. Hernandez-Gea V, Friedman SL. Pathogenesis of liver fibrosis. Annu
Rev Pathol 2011;6:425-56.
4. Poelstra K. Liver fibrosis in 2015: crucial steps towards an effective
treatment. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;13:67-8.
5. Bansal R, Prakash J, de Ruijter M, Beljaars L, Poelstra K. Peptide-modified
albumin carrier explored as a novel strategy for a cell-specific delivery of
interferon gamma to treat liver fibrosis. Mol Pharm 2011;8:1899-909.
6. Bansal R, Prakash J, De Ruiter M, Poelstra K. Targeted recombinant fusion
proteins of IFNgamma and mimetic IFNgamma with PDGFbetaR bicyclic
peptide inhibits liver fibrogenesis in vivo. PLoS One 2014;9e89878.
7. Bansal R, Prakash J, Post E, Beljaars L, Schuppan D, Poelstra K. Novel
engineered targeted interferon-gamma blocks hepatic fibrogenesis in
mice. Hepatology 2011;54:586-96.
8. Fallowfield JA, Hayden AL, Snowdon VK, Aucott RL, Stutchfield BM,
Mole DJ, et al. Relaxin modulates human and rat hepatic myofibroblast
function and ameliorates portal hypertension in vivo. Hepatology
2014;59:1492-504.
9. Sasser JM. The emerging role of relaxin as a novel therapeutic pathway
in the treatment of chronic kidney disease. Am J Physiol Regul Integr
Comp Physiol 2013;305:R559-65.
10. Feijoo-Bandin S, Aragon-Herrera A, Rodriguez-Penas D, Portoles M,
Rosello-Lleti E, Rivera M, et al. Relaxin-2 in Cardiometabolic diseases:
mechanisms of action and future perspectives. Front Physiol 2017;8:599.
11. Bennett RG, Heimann DG, Singh S, Simpson RL, Tuma DJ. Relaxin
decreases the severity of established hepatic fibrosis in mice. Liver Int
2014;34:416-26.
12. Hewitson TD, Mookerjee I, Masterson R, Zhao C, Tregear GW, Becker GJ,
et al. Endogenous relaxin is a naturally occurring modulator of experimental
renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Endocrinology 2007;148:660-9.
13. Samuel CS, Lekgabe ED, Mookerjee I. The effects of relaxin on
extracellular matrix remodeling in health and fibrotic disease. Adv Exp
Med Biol 2007;612:88-103.
14. Lekgabe ED, Kiriazis H, Zhao C, Xu Q, Moore XL, Su Y, et al. Relaxin
reverses cardiac and renal fibrosis in spontaneously hypertensive rats.
Hypertension 2005;46:412-8.
B. Nagórniewicz et al / Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine 17 (2019) 106–118 117
15. Du XJ, Xu Q, Lekgabe E, Gao XM, Kiriazis H, Moore XL, et al.
Reversal of cardiac fibrosis and related dysfunction by relaxin. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 2009;1160:278-84.
16. Samuel CS, Zhao C, Yang Q, Wang H, Tian H, Tregear GW, et al.
The relaxin gene knockout mouse: a model of progressive scleroderma.
J Invest Dermatol 2005;125:692-9.
17. Chen SA, Perlman AJ, Spanski N, Peterson CM, Sanders SW, Jaffe R, et al.
The pharmacokinetics of recombinant human relaxin in nonpregnant
women after intravenous, intravaginal, and intracervical administration.
Pharm Res 1993;10:834-8.
18. Chen SA, Reed B, Nguyen T, Gaylord N, Fuller GB, Mordenti J. The
pharmacokinetics and absorption of recombinant human relaxin in
nonpregnant rabbits and rhesus monkeys after intravenous and
intravaginal administration. Pharm Res 1993;10:223-7.
19. Debrah DO, Novak J, Matthews JE, Ramirez RJ, Shroff SG, Conrad KP.
Relaxin is essential for systemic vasodilation and increased global arterial
compliance during early pregnancy in conscious rats. Endocrinology
2006;147:5126-31.
20. Lin MM, Kim HH, Kim H, Dobson J, Kim DK. Surface activation and
targeting strategies of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles in canceroriented diagnosis and therapy. Nanomedicine (Lond) 2010;5:109-33.
21. Rosen JE, Chan L, Shieh DB, Gu FX. Iron oxide nanoparticles for targeted
cancer imaging and diagnostics. Nanomedicine 2012;8:275-90.
22. Tassa C, Shaw SY, Weissleder R. Dextran-coated iron oxide
nanoparticles: a versatile platform for targeted molecular imaging,
molecular diagnostics, and therapy. Acc Chem Res 2011;44:842-52.
23. Frimpong RA, Hilt JZ. Magnetic nanoparticles in biomedicine: synthesis,
functionalization and applications. Nanomedicine (Lond) 2010;5:1401-14.
24. Issa B, Obaidat IM, Albiss BA, Haik Y. Magnetic nanoparticles: surface
effects and properties related to biomedicine applications. Int J Mol Sci
2013;14:21266-305.
25. Tanimoto A, Kuribayashi S. Application of superparamagnetic iron oxide
to imaging of hepatocellular carcinoma. Eur J Radiol 2006;58:200-16.
26. McBride A, Hoy AM, Bamford MJ, Mossakowska DE, Ruediger MP,
Griggs J, et al. In search of a small molecule agonist of the relaxin
receptor RXFP1 for the treatment of liver fibrosis. Sci Rep 2017;710806.
27. Friedman SL. Mechanisms of hepatic fibrogenesis. Gastroenterology
2008;134:1655-69.
28. Inagaki Y, Okazaki I. Emerging insights into transforming growth factor
beta Smad signal in hepatic fibrogenesis. Gut 2007;56:284-92.
29. Lemoinne S, Cadoret A, El Mourabit H, Thabut D, Housset C. Origins and
functions of liver myofibroblasts. Biochim Biophys Acta 2013;1832:948-54.
30. Samuel CS. Relaxin: antifibrotic properties and effects in models of
disease. Clin Med Res 2005;3:241-9.
31. Giannandrea M, Parks WC. Diverse functions of matrix metalloproteinases during fibrosis. Dis Model Mech 2014;7:193-203.
32. Chaparro M, Sanz-Cameno P, Trapero-Marugan M, Garcia-Buey L,
Moreno-Otero R. Mechanisms of angiogenesis in chronic inflammatory
liver disease. Ann Hepatol 2007;6:208-13.
33. Amarapurkar AD, Amarapurkar DN, Vibhav S, Patel ND. Angiogenesis
in chronic liver disease. Ann Hepatol 2007;6:170-3.
34. Hossain MA, Wade JD, Bathgate RA. Chimeric relaxin peptides
highlight the role of the A-chain in the function of H2 relaxin. Peptides
2012;35:102-6.
35. Kauscher U, Ravoo BJ. Mannose-decorated cyclodextrin vesicles: the
interplay of multivalency and surface density in lectin-carbohydrate
recognition. Beilstein J Org Chem 2012;8:1543-51.
36. Bansal R, Nagorniewicz B, Prakash J. Clinical advancements in the targeted
therapies against liver fibrosis. Mediators Inflamm 2016;2016, 7629724.
37. Yazdani S, Bansal R, Prakash J. Drug targeting to myofibroblasts:
implications for fibrosis and cancer. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2017;121:101-16.
38. Bansal R, Prakash J, De Ruiter M, Poelstra K. Interferon gamma
peptidomimetic targeted to hepatic stellate cells ameliorates acute and
chronic liver fibrosis in vivo. J Control Release 2014;179:18-24.
39. Chen CZ, Southall N, Xiao J, Marugan JJ, Ferrer M, Hu X, et al.
Identification of small-molecule agonists of human relaxin family
receptor 1 (RXFP1) by using a homogenous cell-based cAMP assay.
J Biomol Screen 2013;18:670-7.
40. Singh S, Simpson RL, Bennett RG. Relaxin activates peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) through a pathway
involving PPARgamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC1alpha). J Biol Chem
2015;290:950-9.
41. Xiao J, Chen CZ, Huang Z, Agoulnik IU, Ferrer M, Southall N, et al.
Discovery, Optimization, and Biological Activity of the First Potent
and Selective Small-Molecule Agonist Series of Human Relaxin Receptor
1 (RXFP1). Bethesda (MD): Probe Reports from the NIH Molecular
Libraries Program; 2010.
42. Xiao J, Huang Z, Chen CZ, Agoulnik IU, Southall N, Hu X, et al.
Identification and optimization of small-molecule agonists of the human
relaxin hormone receptor RXFP1. Nat Commun 2013;4:1953.
43. Bathgate RA, Lekgabe ED, McGuane JT, Su Y, Pham T, Ferraro T, et al.
Adenovirus-mediated delivery of relaxin reverses cardiac fibrosis. Mol
Cell Endocrinol 2008;280:30-8.
44. Samuel CS, Hewitson TD, Unemori EN, Tang ML. Drugs of the future:
the hormone relaxin. Cell Mol Life Sci 2007;64:1539-57.
45. Xu Q, Lekgabe ED, Gao XM, Ming Z, Tregear GW, Dart AM, et al.
Endogenous relaxin does not affect chronic pressure overload-induced
cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis. Endocrinology 2008;149:476-82.
46. Du XJ, Bathgate RA, Samuel CS, Dart AM, Summers RJ. Cardiovascular effects of relaxin: from basic science to clinical therapy. Nat Rev
Cardiol 2010;7:48-58.
47. Samuel CS, Royce SG, Hewitson TD, Denton KM, Cooney TE, Bennett
RG. Anti-fibrotic actions of relaxin. Br J Pharmacol 2017;174:962-76.
48. Wang C, Kemp-Harper BK, Kocan M, Ang SY, Hewitson TD, Samuel
CS. The anti-fibrotic actions of Relaxin are mediated through a NO-sGCcGMP-dependent pathway in renal Myofibroblasts in vitro and enhanced
by the NO donor, Diethylamine NONOate. Front Pharmacol 2016;7:91.
49. Bani D, Nistri S, Quattrone S, Bigazzi M, Bani Sacchi T. The vasorelaxant
hormone relaxin induces changes in liver sinusoid microcirculation: a
morphologic study in the rat. J Endocrinol 2001;171:541-9.
50. Bani D, Nistri S, Quattrone S, Bigazzi M, Sacchi TB. Relaxin causes
changes of the liver. In vivo studies in rats. Horm Metab Res
2001;33:175-80.
51. Bennett RG, Kharbanda KK, Tuma DJ. Inhibition of markers of hepatic
stellate cell activation by the hormone relaxin. Biochem Pharmacol
2003;66:867-74.
52. Bennett RG, Dalton SR, Mahan KJ, Gentry-Nielsen MJ, Hamel FG,
Tuma DJ. Relaxin receptors in hepatic stellate cells and cirrhotic liver.
Biochem Pharmacol 2007;73:1033-40.
53. Teerlink JR, Cotter G, Davison BA, Felker GM, Filippatos G, Greenberg
BH, et al. Serelaxin, recombinant human relaxin-2, for treatment of acute
heart failure (RELAX-AHF): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet 2013;381:29-39.
54. Talwalkar JA, Yin M, Fidler JL, Sanderson SO, Kamath PS, Ehman RL.
Magnetic resonance imaging of hepatic fibrosis: emerging clinical
applications. Hepatology 2008;47:332-42.
55. Li Z, Sun J, Yang X. Recent advances in molecular magnetic resonance
imaging of liver fibrosis. Biomed Res Int 2015;2015595467.