GLK-IKK   signaling induces dimerization and
translocation of the AhR-ROR t complex in IL-17A
induction and autoimmune disease
Huai-Chia Chuang1
, Ching-Yi Tsai1
, Chia-Hsin Hsueh1
, Tse-Hua Tan1,2*
Retinoic-acid-receptor-related orphan nuclear receptor  t (ROR t) controls the transcription of interleukin-17A
(IL-17A), which plays critical roles in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. Severity of several human autoimmune diseases is correlated with frequencies of germinal center kinase–like kinase (GLK) (also known as
MAP4K3)–overexpressing T cells; however, the mechanism of GLK overexpression–induced autoimmunity remains
unclear. We report the signal transduction converging on aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)–ROR t interaction to
activate transcription of the IL-17A gene in T cells. T cell–specific GLK transgenic mice spontaneously developed
autoimmune diseases with selective induction of IL-17A in T cells. In GLK transgenic T cells, protein kinase C
(PKC) phosphorylated AhR at Ser36 and induced AhR nuclear translocation. AhR also interacted with ROR t and
transported ROR t into the nucleus. IKK   (inhibitor of nuclear factor  B kinase   )–mediated ROR t Ser489 phosphorylation induced the AhR-ROR t interaction. T cell receptor (TCR) signaling also induced the novel ROR t
phosphorylation and subsequent AhR-ROR t interaction. Collectively, TCR signaling or GLK overexpression induces IL-17A transcription through the IKK  -mediated ROR t phosphorylation and the AhR-ROR t interaction in
T cells. Our findings suggest that inhibitors of GLK or the AhR-ROR t complex could be used as IL-17A–blocking
agents for IL-17A–mediated autoimmune diseases.
INTRODUCTION
Autoimmune diseases, which are chronic, debilitating, and lifethreatening, arise from immune system overactivation. T helper
17 cells [TH17, interleukin-17A (IL-17A)–producing CD4+
 T cells]
and IL-17A play critical roles in the pathogenesis of autoimmune
diseases (1, 2). Induction of IL-17A occurs in the synovial fluids
from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients (3) and in the renal biopsies from systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients (1). IL-17A
facilitates differentiation of osteoclasts, which lead to arthritis (3).
IL-17A also promotes B cell proliferation and class switch recombination, contributing to autoantibody production and autoimmune
responses (4). Furthermore, IL-17A overexpression causes tissue
damage by inducing infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages
through multiple chemokines (1, 2, 5). IL-17A knockout (KO) or
IL-17A blockade abolishes disease development in animal autoimmune models such as experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) and collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) (2). Thus,
understanding the mechanism(s) controlling IL-17A transcription
may lead to the discovery of novel therapeutic targets for autoimmune diseases.
IL-1  , IL-6, IL-21, and IL-23 facilitate TH17 differentiation
(1, 2, 6, 7). The TH17 lineage–specific transcription factor ROR t
binds to the IL-17A promoter and controls IL-17A gene transcription (8, 9). Transforming growth factor–   (TGF-  )–induced Foxp3,
a regulatory T cell (Treg) lineage–specific transcription factor,
suppresses IL-17A expression by interacting with and inactivating
ROR t (10, 11). Besides ROR t, several non–lineage-specific transcription factors play important roles in regulating IL-17A transcription. IL-6– or IL-23–stimulated signal transducer and activator
of transcription 3 (STAT3) binds to the IL-17A promoter and
enhances IL-17A transcription (12, 13). ROCK (Rho-associated,
coiled-coil-containing protein kinase)–phosphorylated interferon
(IFN) regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) also promotes IL-17A transcription upon TGF-   signaling (14). Basic leucine zipper ATF-like
transcription factor (BATF) controls TH17 differentiation through
binding to the intergenic elements between the IL-17A and IL-17F
genes, as well as to the IL-21 or IL-22 promoters (15). Krüppel-like
factor 4 (KLF4) binds to the IL-17A promoter and contributes to
TH17 differentiation independent of ROR t expression (16). Aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) promotes TH17 polarization by inducing IL-17A transcription (17, 18) and inhibiting the negative regulator
STAT1 during TH17 differentiation (19). Conversely, T cell–specific
AhR KO mice have impaired TH17 differentiation and are resistant
to TH17-mediated experimental autoimmune arthritis (20). Various
pathogenic TH17 subpopulations can be derived in vitro under different conditions (21). Nevertheless, the in vivo roles of these distinct
TH17 subpopulations in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases
remain unclear.
MAP4K3 (also named GLK) is a mammalian Ste20-like serine/
threonine kinase that was first identified as an upstream activator
for the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway (22, 23). GLK plays an
important role in T cell receptor (TCR) signaling by directly
phosphorylating and activating PKC, leading to activation of
IKK   [inhibitor of nuclear factor  B (NF- B) kinase   ] and NF- B
in T cells (24). Moreover, clinical samples from patients with autoimmune diseases, such as SLE, RA, or adult-onset Still’s disease, show
markedly increased GLK expression in T cells; the frequencies of
GLK-expressing T cells are positively correlated with disease severity (24–26). Consistent with the correlation of high levels of
GLK expression with autoimmune disease, GLK-deficient mice are
resistant to TH17-mediated EAE induction or CIA induction and
display lower TH17 responses (24, 26). Besides TH17, differentiation
of TH1 and TH2 is also impaired in GLK-deficient T cells because of
1
Immunology Research Center, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan 35053,
Taiwan. 2
Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: ttan@nhri.org.tw
Copyright © 2018
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
original U.S. Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
License 4.0 (CC BY).
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
2 of 15
impaired TCR signaling (24). However, it remains unclear how GLK
overexpression contributes to multiple human autoimmune diseases.
To understand the pathogenic mechanism of GLK overexpression–
induced autoimmune diseases, we generated and characterized T cell–
specific GLK transgenic (Lck-GLK Tg) mice. Here, we report that
GLK signaling induces a novel interaction between AhR and phosphoROR t through PKC and IKK  , leading to IL-17A transcriptional
activation and autoimmune responses.
RESULTS
Lck-GLK Tg mice develop autoimmune diseases
through IL-17A
To study the consequence of GLK overexpression in vivo, we
generated Lck-GLK Tg mice (fig. S1, A and B). Lck-GLK Tg mice
displayed normal development of T cells and B cells (fig. S1, C
to H); however, the mice displayed paralysis of the hindlimb and
tail, clouding of the eye, or symptoms of proctitis and dermatitis
between 8 and 16 weeks of age (fig. S2A). Lck-GLK Tg mice also
showed hepatosplenomegaly and enlargement of lymph nodes
and kidneys (fig. S2B). Histology staining showed the induction
of pneumonia, nephritis, and spleen abnormality in these mice
(Fig. 1A). Induction of serum autoantibodies in Lck-GLK Tg mice
(Fig. 1B) also suggests the development of autoimmune responses
in these mice. To study which proinflammatory cytokines contribute to autoimmune diseases in Lck-GLK Tg mice, we determined serum cytokines via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Surprisingly, only IL-17A was selectively induced in the
sera of 4-week-old Lck-GLK Tg mice (Fig. 1C), whereas the proinflammatory cytokines IFN-  and tumor necrosis factor– (TNF-)
were not induced. Consistently, in vitro TH17 differentiation of
Lck-GLK Tg T cells was increased compared to that of wild-type
T cells (fig. S2C), whereas in vitro TH1 differentiation of Lck-GLK Tg
T cells was unaffected (fig. S2C). Moreover, IL-17A production was
induced in unstimulated T cells of Lck-GLK Tg mice compared
to that of wild-type mice (fig. S2D). To rule out the potential
position effect of the transgene, we also characterized the second
Lck-GLK Tg mouse line (Lck-GLK #2) (fig. S1B). The second line
of Lck-GLK Tg mice also displayed GLK overexpression in T cells
(fig. S1B) and induction of serum IL-17A levels (fig. S2E). These
data suggest that GLK overexpression in T cells induces IL-17A
production in mice.
To demonstrate the pathogenic role of IL-17A in Lck-GLK
Tg mice, we bred Lck-GLK Tg mice with IL-17A–deficient mice.
GLK-induced serum IL-17A levels were significantly decreased
by IL-17A deficiency, while other inflammatory cytokine
levels were unaffected (fig. S3A). Moreover, autoantibody levels
were also significantly reduced in Lck-GLK Tg/IL-17A–deficient
mice compared to those in Lck-GLK Tg mice (Fig. 1D). Lck-GLK
Tg/IL-17A–deficient mice displayed a reduction of infiltrating inflammatory cells in the kidneys, the liver, and the lung, while showing normal distribution of white pulp and red pulp in the spleen,
compared to those in Lck-GLK Tg mice (fig. S3B). The data suggest
that IL-17A contributes to autoimmune responses in Lck-GLK
Tg mice. To further demonstrate that the induction of IL-17A is due
to GLK overexpression, we treated Lck-GLK T cells with GLK short
hairpin RNA (shRNA). IL-17A overproduction was abolished by
GLK shRNA knockdown in T cells purified from Lck-GLK Tg mice
(Fig. 1E). These results demonstrate that GLK overexpression induces
IL-17A overproduction and subsequent autoimmune phenotypes in mice.
GLK induces IL-17A transcription by activating
AhR and ROR t
Next, we studied the mechanism of GLK-induced IL-17A in T cells.
The levels of IL-23 receptor and phosphorylated STAT3 were
not increased in T cells of Lck-GLK Tg mice (fig. S4, A and B),
suggesting that IL-17A overexpression is not due to enhancement
of IL-23 signaling or IL-6/STAT3 signaling. Consistent with the
IL-17A protein levels, mRNA levels of IL-17A were significantly
increased in the purified T cells of Lck-GLK Tg mice compared
to those of wild-type mice (Fig. 2A). We studied whether IL-17A
overexpression is due to transcriptional activation of the IL-17A
promoter. IL-17A promoter activities in Jurkat T cells were enhanced by GLK overexpression but not by GLK kinase-dead (K45E)
mutant (Fig. 2B). Next, we studied the bindings of individual
IL-17A transcription factors to the IL-17A promoter (Fig. 2, C
and D). ChIP analyses showed that bindings of AhR and ROR t
(−877) to the IL-17A promoter were induced in T cells of Lck-GLK
Tg mice (Fig. 2D), whereas bindings of STAT3, IRF4, KLF4, and
BATF to the IL-17A promoter were not enhanced (Fig. 2D). The
binding of ROR t to the −120 region of the IL-17A promoter
was not significantly induced (Fig. 2D); others reported similar
findings (27, 28). Consistent with ChIP data, mutation of the
AhR-binding element or the ROR t-binding site (−877) abolished
the GLK-enhanced IL-17A reporter activity, whereas mutation
of the STAT3-binding site (Fig. 2E) or the ROR t-binding site
(−120) did not affect the GLK-induced IL-17A reporter activity
(fig. S4C). Notably, GLK overexpression induced AhR response
element–driven reporter (XRE-Luc) activity (Fig. 2F), whereas
ROR t (−877) or STAT3 response element–driven reporter (ROR tLuc or SIE-Luc) activity was unaffected (Fig. 2F). These results
suggest that GLK signaling induces IL-17A transcription by activating AhR and maybe ROR t.
GLK controls IL-17A production and autoimmune
responses through AhR
To further demonstrate the role of AhR in promoting IL-17A
production in Lck-GLK Tg mice, we bred Lck-GLK Tg mice with
T cell–specific AhR conditional KO (AhR cKO: AhRf/f;CD4-Cre)
mice. Serum IL-17A levels were drastically reduced in Lck-GLK/
AhR cKO (Lck-GLK;AhRf/f;CD4-Cre) mice, whereas serum
TNF- and IFN-  levels were unaffected by AhR deficiency
(Fig. 3A). Levels of ANA, anti-dsDNA antibody, and RF were
also decreased in Lck-GLK/AhR cKO mice compared to those in
Lck-GLK Tg mice (fig. S5A). Histology staining showed that AhR
KO abolished induction of nephritis and spleen abnormality in LckGLK Tg mice (fig. S5B). AhR KO also suppressed infiltration of inflammatory immune cells in the liver of Lck-GLK Tg mice (fig. S5B).
The data indicate that AhR plays a critical role in the IL-17A overproduction and autoimmune responses in Lck-GLK Tg mice.
PKC phosphorylates AhR at Ser36 and induces
AhR nuclear translocation
Next, we studied the mechanism of GLK-induced AhR binding
to the IL-17A promoter. The confocal images (using two different
anti-AhR antibodies; Fig. 3B and fig. S5C) and subcellular fractionation experiments (Fig. 3C) showed that AhR nuclear translocation
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
3 of 15
Fig. 1. Lck-GLK Tg mice display autoimmune phenotypes and selectively increased serum IL-17A levels. (A) Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)–stained sections of the
indicated organs from 16-week-old mice. Scale bars, 100 m. (B) Levels of serum autoantibodies from 20-week-old mice were determined by ELISAs. The levels are presented relative to the value from one of the wild-type (WT) mice. WT, n = 7; Lck-GLK, n = 8. (C) The serum levels of cytokines in 4-week-old mice were determined by ELISAs.
WT, n = 20; Lck-GLK, n = 16. (D) The serum levels of autoantibodies in 20-week-old Lck-GLK and Lck-GLK/IL-17A KO mice were determined by ELISAs. The levels are presented relative to the value from one of the Lck-GLK mice. n = 6 per group. (E) IL-17A expression was attenuated by GLK shRNA. Murine primary splenic T cells were
transfected with green fluorescent protein (GFP)–human GLK shRNA and a control GFP vector. The transfected T cells were stimulated with anti-mouse CD3 antibodies
for 3 hours and then determined by flow cytometry at day 3 after transfection. Data show the events of IL-17A–producing T cells (GFP-gated). WT, wild-type littermate controls; Lck-GLK, T cell–specific GLK Tg mice; Lck-GLK/IL-17A KO, Lck-GLK;IL-17A–deficient mice; ANA, antinuclear antibody; –double-stranded DNA (dsDNA),
anti-dsDNA antibody; RF, rheumatoid factor; APC, allophycocyanin. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 (two-tailed
Student’s t test).
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
4 of 15
Fig. 2. GLK enhances IL-17A expression by inducing AhR and ROR t. (A) Murine IL-17A mRNA levels in peripheral blood T cells from mice were analyzed by real-time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The expression levels of IL-17A were normalized to Mrpl32 levels. The fold changes are presented relative to the value of WT mice. Means ±
SEM are shown. n = 4 per group. (B) Luciferase reporter activity of the IL-17A promoter. Jurkat T cells were cotransfected with the plasmid encoding GLK or GLK
kinase-dead (GLK-K45E) mutant plus the IL-17A promoter (2 kb) construct. Means ± SEM are shown. (C) Schematic diagram of transcription factors on the IL-17A
promoter. bp, base pair. (D) The binding of AhR, ROR t, STAT3, IRF4, KLF4, or BATF to the IL-17A promoter in T cells from mice was analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (IP) (ChIP)–PCR using immunocomplexes from individual IP experiments. (E) Luciferase reporter activity of the IL-17A mutant promoters. Jurkat T cells were
cotransfected with empty vector or GLK plasmid plus the IL-17A promoter construct containing a mutated binding element for AhR, ROR t (−877), or STAT3. (F) Luciferase
reporter activity of AhR, ROR t (−877), and STAT3 response element (XRE-Luc, ROR t-Luc, and SIE-Luc) in Jurkat T cells cotransfected with empty vector or plasmid encoding GLK. XRE, xenobiotic response element; SIE, sis-inducible element. WT, wild-type littermate controls; Lck-GLK, T cell–specific GLK Tg mice. Data shown are representative
of three independent experiments. Means ± SEM of three independent experiments are shown (B, E, and F). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 (two-tailed Student’s t test).
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
5 of 15
Fig. 3. PKC phosphorylates AhR and induces its nuclear translocation. (A) The serum levels of cytokines from 4-week-old WT, Lck-GLK Tg, and Lck-GLK Tg/AhR cKO
mice were determined by ELISAs. n = 8 per group. Means ± SEM are shown. WT, wild-type littermate controls; Lck-GLK, T cell–specific GLK Tg mice; Lck-GLK;AhRf/f;CD4-Cre,
T cell–specific GLK Tg mice bred with AhR cKO mice. ***P < 0.001 (two-tailed Student’s t test). (B) Confocal microscopy analysis of subcellular localization of AhR in murine
splenic T cells without stimulation. An anti-AhR antibody (clone RPT9, Abcam) was used. Original magnification, ×630; scale bars, 10 m. (C) Immunoblotting analyses of
AhR, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and histone 3 in cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions of primary splenic T cells from WT and Lck-GLK Tg mice.
(D) Immunoblotting analysis of p-AhR (Ser36), AhR, and GLK in primary splenic T cells of WT and Lck-GLK Tg mice. (E) Immunoblotting analysis of AhR phosphorylation
and indicated kinases in in vitro kinase assays using Flag-GLK, Flag-PKC, Flag-IKK  , Flag-IKK, and hemagglutinin (HA)–AhR (as the substrate) isolated from individually
transfected HEK293T cells. (F) Coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous AhR with PKC from lysates of primary splenic T cells from WT and Lck-GLK mice without
stimulation. N.S., normal serum. (G) Proximity ligation assays (PLAs) of interaction between endogenous PKC and AhR in peripheral blood T cells from WT or Lck-GLK
Tg mice. Each red dot represents a direct interaction. T cell nucleus was stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (blue). Images were captured with ×400 original
magnification by a Leica DM2500 fluorescence microscope. (H) In vitro kinase assays of purified HA-tagged AhR plus either Myc-tagged PKC WT or PKC kinase-dead
(K409W) mutant proteins. (I) Immunoblotting analysis of phosphorylated AhR (Ser36), AhR, GLK, and PKC in primary splenic T cells of WT, Lck-GLK Tg, and Lck-GLK
Tg mice bred with PKC KO mice. (J) Confocal microscopy analysis of subcellular localization of AhR and PKC in primary splenic T cells of indicated mice. Original magnification, ×630; scale bars, 10 m. WT, wild-type littermate controls; Lck-GLK, T cell–specific GLK Tg mice; Lck-GLK;PKC−/−, Lck-GLK Tg mice bred with PKC KO mice. Data
shown are representative of three independent experiments.
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
6 of 15
was enhanced in T cells of Lck-GLK Tg mice. In addition, we examined whether GLK signaling induces AhR nuclear translocation by
enhancing phosphorylation of AhR. There is only one commercial anti–phospho-AhR antibody that detects phospho-Ser36 AhR;
however, the role of Ser36 phosphorylation in AhR nuclear translocation has not been demonstrated (29). Immunoblotting analyses
using the anti–phospho-AhR antibody for AhR phosphorylation
showed that AhR Ser36 phosphorylation was enhanced in T cells
of Lck-GLK Tg mice, as well as in anti-CD3–stimulated T cells
(Fig. 3D and fig. S5D). These data suggest that GLK overexpression
(and TCR signaling) may induce AhR activity by enhancing AhR
Ser36 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation in T cells.
Next, we investigated which kinase is responsible for phosphorylation
and nuclear translocation of AhR in T cells of GLK Tg mice. SGK1
(serum/glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1) can stabilize TH17 population (30). The basal or TCR-induced SGK1 activation was unchanged in Lck-GLK T cells (fig. S5D), suggesting that SGK1 is not
involved in GLK-induced AhR phosphorylation. GLK signaling
in T cells induces kinase activities of PKC, IKK, and IKK   (24).
To determine which kinase phosphorylates AhR, we immunoprecipitated GLK, PKC, IKK, IKK  , and AhR each from individually transfected human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells
and subjected them to in vitro kinase assays. The data showed
that AhR Ser36 phosphorylation was drastically induced by PKC
in vitro (Fig. 3E). We confirmed the specificity of the antibody for
AhR Ser36 phosphorylation using a wild-type AhR or an S36A
mutant transfectant by immunoblotting (fig. S5E). Immunofluorescence and confocal imaging analyses showed that PKC overexpression enhanced AhR nuclear translocation in Jurkat T cells
(fig. S5F) and HEK293T cells (fig. S5G), whereas AhR-S36A
mutation stayed in the cytoplasm even in PKC-overexpressing
cells (fig. S5, F and G). The data indicate that PKC-mediated Ser36
phosphorylation of AhR stimulates AhR nuclear translocation.
The interaction between PKC and AhR was induced in purified
T cells of Lck-GLK Tg mice (Fig. 3F). Moreover, the proteinprotein interaction/ALPHA (amplified luminescent proximity
homogeneous assay) technology assays showed an interaction
(<200 nm) between PKC and AhR, but not between GLK and AhR
(fig. S6A). Furthermore, the fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) analysis showed a direct interaction (1 to 10 nm) between
PKC and AhR in PKC/AhR-cotransfected Jurkat T cells (fig. S6B).
To study the subcellular localization and protein interaction
(<40 nm) in vivo, we performed in situ PLA using probes corresponding to PKC and AhR. The PLA data showed strong signals
in the cytoplasm of T cells from Lck-GLK Tg mice (Fig. 3G and
fig. S6C). In situ PLA using probes corresponding to Myc and
Flag tags showed similar results in Myc-PKC– and Flag-AhR–
overexpressing HEK293T cells (fig. S6D). In vitro binding assays
with purified PKC and AhR proteins further confirmed this direct
interaction (fig. S6E). Furthermore, purified PKC phosphorylated
AhR at Ser36, whereas purified kinase-dead (K409W) mutant of
PKC did not (Fig. 3H). These data demonstrate that PKC directly
interacts with and phosphorylates AhR at Ser36, leading to AhR
nuclear translocation.
To verify the role of PKC in AhR nuclear translocation and its
in vivo function, we generated PKC KO mice using transcription
activator-like effector nuclease (TALEN) technology (fig. S7, A to C).
We then bred Lck-GLK Tg mice with PKC KO mice to generate
Lck-GLK;PKC−/− mice. As expected, PKC KO abolished GLKinduced AhR Ser36 phosphorylation in T cells (Fig. 3I). Immunofluorescence and confocal imaging analyses showed that AhR was
detected abundantly in the nucleus of T cells from Lck-GLK Tg mice
(Fig. 3J). In contrast, AhR expression was detected in the cytoplasm, but
not in the nucleus, of T cells from wild-type and Lck-GLK Tg/PKC
KO (Lck-GLK;PKC−/−) mice (Fig. 3J). The serum levels of IL-17A
and autoantibodies were significantly decreased in Lck-GLK;PKC−/−
mice compared to those in Lck-GLK Tg mice (fig. S7, D and E).
Moreover, the inflammatory phenotypes were abolished in Lck-GLK
Tg/PKC KO mice (fig. S7F). Together, these results indicate that
GLK induces IL-17A production by activating PKC-AhR signaling
in T cells.
AhR interacts with ROR t and transports
ROR t into the nucleus
Paradoxically, both AhR- and ROR t-binding elements are required
for the GLK-induced IL-17A reporter activity (Fig. 2E); however,
GLK induced the activity of AhR, but not ROR t, response element
(Fig. 2F). We suspected that AhR may facilitate induction of ROR t
activity. We first studied whether GLK induces ROR t binding
to the IL-17A promoter through AhR. ChIP data showed that
the GLK-induced ROR t binding to the IL-17A promoter was
abolished in AhR KO T cells (Fig. 4A). The data suggest that AhR
facilitates the binding of ROR t to the IL-17A promoter. Next,
we studied whether AhR interacts with ROR t. The interaction
between endogenous AhR and ROR t was drastically enhanced in
T cells of Lck-GLK Tg mice (Fig. 4B). Confocal imaging analysis
showed colocalization of AhR and ROR t in the nucleus of T cells
from Lck-GLK Tg mice (Fig. 4C). ChIP analysis using an antiROR t antibody also showed the binding of ROR t to the AhRbinding element of the IL-17A promoter in T cells of Lck-GLK mice
(Fig. 4D), suggesting that ROR t binds to the AhR-binding element
through the AhR-ROR t complex formation. Moreover, in situ
PLA with probes corresponding to AhR and ROR t showed strong
interaction signals in the nucleus of T cells from Lck-GLK Tg mice
compared to those from wild-type mice (Fig. 4E). These data
indicate direct interaction between AhR and ROR t in the nucleus
of T cells from Lck-GLK Tg mice. In addition, similar to AhR nuclear translocation, GLK-induced ROR t nuclear translocation
was abolished by PKC KO (Fig. 4C). The data support the idea
that PKC-phosphorylated AhR recruits ROR t into the nucleus.
AhR-mediated ROR t nuclear translocation is further confirmed
by AhR KO; ROR t localized exclusively in the cytoplasm in T cells
of Lck-GLK;AhRf/f;CD4-Cre mice even in the presence of functional
PKC (Fig. 4C, bottom). Thus, this result rules out the possibility
that PKC directly regulates ROR t nuclear translocation. Collectively, these results indicate that AhR directly interacts with and
transports ROR t into the nucleus in GLK-overexpressing T cells.
IKK  -mediated ROR t Ser489 phosphorylation induces
AhR-ROR t interaction
Surprisingly, in situ PLA showed an interaction between AhR and
ROR t even in the cytoplasm of Lck-GLK;PKC−/− T cells (Fig. 4E).
This result suggests that the interaction between AhR and ROR t
is not regulated by AhR phosphorylation. Interaction between AhR
and ROR t is still detectable in Lck-GLK;PKC−/− T cells (Fig. 4E);
this result may be due to a compensatory signaling event in PKC
KO mice. To identify the kinase that stimulates the interaction between AhR and ROR t, we initially tested the potential role of GLK,
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
7 of 15
Fig. 4. GLK induces ROR t binding to the IL-17A promoter through AhR and ROR t interaction. (A) Binding of ROR t to the IL-17A promoter in T cells from indicated
mice was analyzed by ChIP-PCR. (B) Coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous AhR with ROR t using lysates of primary splenic T cells from WT and Lck-GLK mice without
any stimulation. IB, immunoblotting. (C) Confocal microscopy analysis of subcellular localization of AhR and ROR t in primary T cells of WT, Lck-GLK Tg, Lck-GLK;PKC−/−,
and Lck-GLK;AhRf/f;CD4-Cre mice. Original magnification, ×630; scale bars, 10 m. (D) Binding of AhR and ROR t to the IL-17A promoter in T cells from mice was analyzed
by ChIP-PCR using anti-ROR t immunocomplexes. (E) Confocal microscopy analysis of PLAs for the interaction between endogenous AhR and ROR t in peripheral
blood T cells from WT, Lck-GLK Tg, and Lck-GLK;PKC−/− mice. Original magnification, ×630; scale bars, 10 m. (F) Coimmunoprecipitation experiments of HA-tagged
AhR and Flag-tagged ROR t using lysates of HEK293T cells cotransfected with GLK–cyan fluorescent protein (CFP), PKC-Myc, IKK  -CFP, or IKK-Myc plasmid. (G) GST
pulldown assays of purified Flag-tagged ROR t and GST-tagged AhR proteins. Flag-tagged ROR t proteins were eluted with Flag peptides using lysates of HEK293T cells
cotransfected with Flag-ROR t plus either CFP-IKK   or vector. For PLA, each red dot represents a direct interaction. T cell nucleus was stained with DAPI (blue). Data
shown are representative of three independent experiments.
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
8 of 15
IKK, or IKK   in the induction of AhR-ROR t interaction. We
cotransfected the kinase GLK, PKC, IKK, or IKK   with AhR plus
ROR t into HEK293T cells, followed by coimmunoprecipitation
assays. The data showed that IKK   overexpression enhanced the
interaction between AhR and ROR t, whereas overexpression of
GLK, PKC, and IKK did not (Fig. 4F). Next, we tested whether IKK   stimulates ROR t phosphorylation, which then induces
the interaction of ROR t with AhR. Flag-tagged ROR t was purified from HEK293T cells cotransfected with ROR t plus either
IKK   or vector. Glutathione S-transferase (GST) pulldown assays
showed that purified GST-tagged AhR recombinant proteins strongly
interacted with the purified ROR t proteins from ROR t plus
IKK  -cotransfected cells (Fig.  4G). The data suggest that IKK  
stimulates a direct interaction between AhR and ROR t by inducing ROR t phosphorylation. Conversely, PLA data showed that
IKK   KO abolished the GLK-induced interaction between AhR and
ROR t in T cells of Lck-GLK Tg mice (Fig. 5A). In addition, confocal imaging analysis showed that IKK   KO specifically abolished
nuclear translocation of ROR t, but not AhR, in GLK Tg T cells
(Fig. 5B). Consistently, serum IL-17A levels were also decreased in
Lck-GLK;IKK  f/f;CD4-Cre mice compared to those in Lck-GLK
Tg mice (Fig. 5C). Next, we studied whether IKK   interacts directly
with ROR t. GST and His pulldown assays using purified recombinant GST-tagged IKK   and His-tagged ROR t proteins showed
a direct interaction between IKK   and ROR t (Fig. 5D).
To probe whether IKK   phosphorylates ROR t, we individually
immunoprecipitated Flag-tagged ROR t, IKK  , and IKK   kinasedead (K44M) mutant from HEK293T transfectants and then subjected them to in vitro kinase assays. The data showed that IKK  ,
but not IKK  -K44M mutant, induced ROR t phosphorylation
in vitro (Fig. 5E). To identify the IKK  -targeted ROR t phosphorylation site, we isolated in vitro phosphorylated Flag-tagged
ROR t, followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analyses. Ser489 was
identified as the ROR t phosphorylation site by IKK   (Fig. 5F).
To demonstrate phosphorylation of the ROR t Ser489 site, we generated an anti–phospho-ROR t (Ser489) antibody, which specifically
recognized ROR t wild type but not S489A mutant when cotransfected with IKK   (Fig. 5G). Immunoblotting using this phosphoantibody showed that ROR t Ser489 phosphorylation was induced in
T cells of Lck-GLK Tg mice, and the phosphorylation was abolished
by IKK   KO (Fig. 5H). Consistently, ROR t-S489A mutant failed to
interact with AhR under IKK   overexpression (Fig. 5I). Together,
in GLK-overexpressing T cells, IKK   phosphorylates ROR t at
Ser489 and induces its interaction with AhR, which then transports
ROR t into the nucleus and cooperates with ROR t to stimulate
IL-17A transcription.
Phosphorylated ROR t interacts with AhR in TCR-induced or
murine autoimmune T cells
Because both GLK and IKK   (24) activation and IL-17A production (31, 32) are inducible by TCR signaling, we asked whether
phosphorylated ROR t-mediated AhR-ROR t interaction is also
induced by TCR signaling. We found that, following IKK   activation, anti-CD3 stimulation induced ROR t Ser489 phosphorylation
in murine T cells (Fig. 6A). Moreover, coimmunoprecipitation
assays and PLA showed that TCR signaling induced the interaction between endogenous ROR t and AhR (Fig. 6B and fig. S8A).
TCR signaling also stimulated the interaction between AhR and
Ser489-phosphorylated ROR t (fig. S8B). Conversely, IKK   cKO
abolished the TCR-induced ROR t Ser489 phosphorylation (Fig. 6C)
and the AhR-ROR t interaction (Fig. 6D) in T cells. These data
suggest that IKK  -mediated ROR t phosphorylation and subsequent AhR-ROR t interaction are induced during T cell activation.
To investigate whether IKK  -mediated ROR t phosphorylation
regulates IL-17A production after TCR stimulation, we determined secreted cytokines from anti-CD3–stimulated T cells by
ELISA. Consistent with previous reports (31, 32), TCR signaling
induced IL-17A production in T cells (Fig. 6, E and F). IKK   cKO
abolished TCR-induced IL-17A production in T cells (Fig. 6E), supporting the notion that TCR-activated IKK   induces IL-17A production in normal T cells. As expected, TCR-induced levels of
several IKK  /NF- B–mediated cytokines (IL-2, IFN- , IL-4,
IL-6, and TNF-) (table S1) were also reduced in T cells of IKK  
cKO mice (Fig. 6E). To further verify the IKK  –ROR t–IL-17A
pathway, we used primary splenic T cells from T cell–specific
ROR t cKO mice. Unlike IKK   cKO, ROR t cKO only abolished IL-17A production upon TCR stimulation (Fig. 6F). We
verified the abolishment of ROR t expression in T cells of
ROR t cKO mice by immunoblotting analysis (Fig. 6G). The
data suggest that IKK  -ROR t activation mainly induces IL-17A
production during TCR signaling, while IKK  –NF- B activation
regulates the production of multiple cytokines, including IL-2,
IFN- , IL-4, IL-6, and TNF- (Fig. 6H and fig. S9).
DISCUSSION
IL-17A is a major proinflammatory cytokine enhanced in the sera
of patients with autoimmune diseases. Identification of upstream
kinases and transcriptional mechanisms for IL-17A production
should facilitate development of novel therapeutic approaches for
IL-17A–mediated diseases. Here, we report that GLK, PKC, and
IKK   are key kinases controlling IL-17A transcription through a
bifurcate signaling cascade in pathogenic TH17 cells.
A key finding of this report indicates that ROR t is a novel target
of IKK  ; IKK   directly phosphorylates ROR t at Ser489, leading
to IL-17A induction. To our knowledge, this IKK  -phosphorylated
Ser489 is the first identified pathogenic phosphorylation site of ROR t.
IL-17A induction is concomitant with increased ROR t mRNA levels
under TH17 polarization conditions in vitro (28, 33, 34); however,
ROR t mRNA levels are unchanged during TCR-induced IL-17A
induction (32). Because of the strong induction of ROR t expression
during in vitro TH17 differentiation (28, 33, 34), one might think
that ROR t proteins are not expressed before TH17 differentiation.
However, ROR t mRNA levels in murine TH0 cells are detectable,
although very low (35, 36). Moreover, ROR t proteins in human
TH0 cells (36) or murine naïve CD4+
 T cells (37–39) are detectable
by immunoblotting. The ROR t protein levels in naïve CD4+
 T cells
are one-fifth of those in TH17 cells (38). Furthermore, data using
ROR t-GFP reporter mice and flow cytometry also show that some
CD3+
 T cells in the spleen, lymph nodes, bone marrow, lung, and
skin express ROR t proteins (40), and less than 50% of these infiltrating ROR t
+
 T cells express IL-17A (40). These data indicate that
ROR t proteins are expressed in naïve T cells. Collectively, either
overexpression or Ser489 phosphorylation of ROR t can lead to
IL-17A transcriptional activation. Ser489-phosphorylated ROR t
interacts with AhR and is transported into the nucleus by AhR.
Notably, both TCR-stimulated or autoimmune T cells displayed
induction of ROR t Ser489 phosphorylation and AhR-ROR t
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
9 of 15
Fig. 5. IKK   phosphorylates ROR t Ser489, leading to ROR t binding to AhR. (A) Confocal microscopy analysis of PLAs for the interaction between endogenous AhR
and ROR t in peripheral blood T cells from WT, Lck-GLK Tg, and Lck-GLK;IKK  f/f;CD4-Cre mice. (B) Confocal microscopy analysis of subcellular localization of AhR and
ROR t in primary splenic T cells of WT, Lck-GLK Tg, and Lck-GLK;IKK  f/f;CD4-Cre mice. Original magnification, ×630; scale bars, 10 m. (C) The serum levels of cytokines in
8-week-old mice were determined by ELISAs. IKK  f/f, n = 6; Lck-GLK, n = 6; Lck-GLK; IKK  f/f, n = 5. Means ± SEM are shown. *P < 0.05 (two-tailed Student’s t test). (D) Direct
interaction between recombinant proteins of ROR t and IKK  . GST or His pulldown assays of purified His-tagged ROR t and GST-tagged IKK   proteins. (E) In vitro kinase
assays of immunoprecipitated Flag-tagged ROR t and either IKK   or IKK   kinase-dead (K44M) mutant proteins from individual HEK293T transfectants. (F) Tandem
MS (MS/MS) fragmentation spectra of the tryptic peptides of ROR t contain the phosphorylation of Ser489. m/z, mass/charge ratio. (G) Antibody specificity of anti–
phospho-ROR t (Ser489) was demonstrated by immunoblotting using HEK293T cells cotransfected with CFP-tagged IKK   plus either Flag-tagged ROR t WT or ROR tS489A mutant. (H) Immunoblotting analyses of p-ROR t (Ser489), ROR t, p-IKK   (Ser180/181), and IKK   in primary splenic T cells of WT, Lck-GLK Tg, and Lck-GLK;IKK  f/f;
CD4-Cre mice. (I) Coimmunoprecipitation experiments of HA-tagged AhR and either Flag-tagged ROR t WT or ROR t-S489A mutant using lysates of HEK293T cells
cotransfected with vector or IKK  -CFP plasmid. WT, wild-type littermate controls; Lck-GLK, T cell–specific GLK Tg mice; Lck-GLK;IKK  f/f;CD4-Cre, T cell–specific GLK Tg mice
bred with IKK   cKO mice. For PLA, each red dot represents a direct interaction. T cell nucleus was stained with DAPI (blue). Data shown (A, B, D, E, and G to I) are representative of three independent experiments.
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
10 of 15
Fig. 6. TCR signaling induces ROR t phosphorylation and subsequent AhR-ROR t interaction. (A) Immunoblotting analysis of p-ROR t (Ser489), ROR t, p-IKK  
(Ser180/181), and IKK   in primary splenic T cells. T cells were stimulated with anti-CD3 antibodies plus streptavidin (3 g each per milliliter). (B) Coimmunoprecipitation of
endogenous AhR with ROR t from lysates of murine primary splenic T cells stimulated with anti-CD3 antibodies plus streptavidin (3 g each per milliliter). (C) Immunoblotting analysis of p-ROR t (Ser489), ROR t, and IKK   in primary splenic T cells of IKK  f/f or CD4-Cre;IKK  f/f mice. T cells were stimulated with anti-CD3 antibodies plus
streptavidin (3 g each per milliliter). (D) Confocal microscopy analysis of PLAs for the interaction between endogenous AhR and ROR t (left) or between AhR and
Ser489-phosphorylated ROR t (right) in primary T cells of IKK  f/f or IKK  f/f;CD4-Cre mice. T cells were stimulated as in (C). Each red dot represents a direct interaction. T cell
nucleus was stained with DAPI (blue). Original magnification, ×630; scale bars, 10 m. (E and F) ELISA of various cytokines in supernatants of primary splenic T cells from
IKK  f/f or IKK  f/f;CD4-Cre mice (E), as well as ROR t
f/f or ROR t
f/f;CD4-Cre mice (F). T cells were stimulated with plate-bound anti-CD3 antibodies (2 g each per milliliter) for
3 days. Means ± SD are shown. n = 3 per group. (G) Immunoblotting of ROR t and GAPDH proteins from primary splenic T cells of ROR t
f/f or ROR t
f/f;CD4-Cre mice. Data shown
(A to G) are representative of three independent experiments. (H) Schematic model of IL-17A transcription induced by the AhR-ROR t complex in GLK-overexpressing or
TCR-stimulated T cells. GLK overexpression in T cells of T cell–specific GLK Tg (Lck-GLK Tg) mice induces AhR Ser36 phosphorylation through PKC and also induces ROR t Ser489
phosphorylation through IKK  . Once ROR t is phosphorylated, ROR t interacts directly with AhR. Phosphorylated AhR is responsible for transporting ROR t into cell nucleus.
The AhR-ROR t complex binds to both the ROR t-binding element (−877 to −872) and the AhR-binding element (−254 to −249) of the IL-17A promoter, leading to induction of IL-17A transcription. In normal T cells, TCR stimulation also induces GLK kinase activity and downstream signaling, including IKK   activation, ROR t Ser489 phosphorylation, and the AhR-ROR t interaction. Besides NF- B, other critical transcription factors [such as nuclear factor of activated T cell 1 (NFAT1) or activator protein 1
(AP-1)] are also required for the transcriptional activation of IL-2, IFN- , IL-4, IL-6, and TNF- in T cells. “Others” denotes other critical transcription factors (table S1). NF- B
is required for TCR-induced production of multiple cytokines; however, the GLK–IKK  –NF- B cascade alone is not sufficient for the induction of multiple cytokines.
Collectively, GLK overexpression or TCR signaling induces IL-17A transcription through AhR and ROR t in T cells.
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
11 of 15
interaction. These findings suggest that IKK  -mediated ROR t
Ser489 phosphorylation is a common transcriptional activation
mechanism of IL-17A induction in T cell activation or autoimmune
diseases. Ubiquitination of ROR t at Lys446 negatively regulates
IL-17A, but not IL-17F, production by blocking its interaction
with the coactivator SRC1 (41). In contrast, ROR t K63-linked
ubiquitination at Lys69 is required for IL-17A transcription (42).
In addition, CD5 signaling may contribute to ROR t nuclear translocation in TH17 differentiation in vitro (43). IL-6 plus IL-23 stimulation also induces ROR t nuclear translocation in murine neutrophils
in vitro (44). Thus, it is likely that ROR t Ser489 phosphorylation
also cross-talks with or is involved in other signaling events.
One of the exciting findings in this report is that AhR is responsible
for nuclear translocation of ROR t. PKC directly activates AhR by
phosphorylating AhR at Ser36 during TCR signaling and GLK signaling. Ser36 phosphorylation of AhR mediates the nuclear translocation of the AhR-ROR t complex, and both transcription factors then
induce IL-17A transcription. Paradoxically, GLK overexpression
only enhanced AhR (but not ROR t) response element–driven reporter activity. Nevertheless, the mutation of either AhR-binding
site or ROR t-binding site within the IL-17A promoter blocked GLK
signaling–induced IL-17A transcription. It is likely that, besides nuclear translocation of ROR t by AhR, the binding of AhR to the AhR
response element or indirectly binding to other regions within the
IL-17A promoter may also facilitate the binding of ROR t to the
IL-17A promoter. The binding of AhR with its ligand triggers the nuclear translocation and DNA binding activity of AhR; distinct ligands stimulate different physiological functions of AhR in T cells
(45, 46). AhR activation by a natural ligand results in enhanced TH17
population and severe EAE symptoms in mice (45, 47). Besides TCR
signaling, it is possible that AhR Ser36 phosphorylation may also
regulate IL-17A production in ligand-induced or other unliganded
signaling pathways.
GLK is required for TCR signaling and production of several
cytokines such as IFN- , IL-4, and IL-2 (24); however, Lck-GLK
Tg mice showed selective overproduction of IL-17A, but not other
NF- B–mediated cytokines. This dichotomy may be attributed to
the fact that, besides NF- B, other transcription factors (such as
NFAT1 or AP-1) are also required for the transcriptional activation
of IL-2, IL-4, IFN- , IL-6, or TNF- during TCR signaling (table S1)
(48, 49). Thus, activation of NF- B alone without activation of
other critical transcription factors in T cell is not sufficient to
induce the production of IL-2, IL-4, IFN- , IL-6, or TNF- (Fig. 6H).
T cell–specific IKK   Tg mice do not display any significant induction of IL-2 or IFN-  in resting T cells, while basal levels of the T cell
activation markers CD25 and CD69 are enhanced (50). Consistently, activated IKK   in GLK Tg T cells is not sufficient to induce
NF- B–mediated cytokines. In addition, STAT3 activation is required for the transcription of IL-17F, IL-21, IL-22, and IL-23R
in TH17 cells (39, 51–53); conversely, IL-6 or IL-21 induces STAT3
activation in TH17 cells (39, 51, 53). It is likely that the reason for the
lack of IL-17F/IL-21/IL-22 induction and IL-23R overexpression
in GLK Tg T cells may be the lack of STAT3 activation. Besides
IL-17A, IL-17F and IL-22 are also regulated by ROR t (53). However, the Lys466-ubiquitinated ROR t regulates the production of
IL-17A, but not IL-17F (41). Our results in this study showed the
binding of the AhR-ROR t complex to the −877, but not the −120,
region of the IL-17A promoter. These findings suggest that the
AhR-ROR t complex does not bind to the ROR t-binding elements
that regulate the transcription of IL-17F and IL-22. Collectively,
the GLK-IKK  -ROR t axis is not sufficient to induce multiple cytokines because of the lack of activation of other critical transcription
factors or the lack of AhR-ROR t complex–binding elements.
Last, it is also plausible that GLK overexpression may suppress
the production of multiple cytokines through an unknown inhibitory mechanism.
Our study reveals a critical pathogenic mechanism of GLKinduced IL-17A transcription in autoimmune diseases. In summary,
GLK signaling induces Ser36 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of AhR through PKC. AhR interacts with ROR t and transports ROR t into the nucleus of T cells. The GLK-PKC-AhR
axis is responsible for the nuclear translocation of ROR t, but not
for the interaction of ROR t with AhR. On the other hand, the
interaction between ROR t and AhR is controlled by IKK  , which
phosphorylates ROR t at Ser489. Similarly, TCR signaling also induces phosphorylation of AhR and ROR t, as well as the interaction
and nuclear translocation of the AhR-ROR t complex. Thus, TCR or
GLK signaling induces IL-17A transcription through the novel ROR t
Ser489 phosphorylation and subsequent AhR-ROR t interaction/
nuclear translocation. Collectively, the GLK-PKC/IKK  -AhR/ROR t
pathway plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of IL-17A–mediated
autoimmune diseases (Fig. 6H and fig. S9). This pathway may also
be involved in other IL-17A–mediated inflammatory diseases that
are induced by other IL-17A+
 cell types (for example, group 3 innate lymphoid cells). Thus, inhibitors of GLK or the AhR-ROR t
complex could be used as IL-17A–blocking agents for the treatment
of IL-17A–mediated diseases. Furthermore, since GLK overexpression is also correlated with cancer recurrence (54, 55), studying the
potential involvement of GLK-IL-17A signaling in cancer recurrence/
metastasis may help future development of cancer therapy.
METHODS
Mice
All animal experiments were performed in the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International
(AAALAC)–accredited animal housing facilities at the National Health
Research Institutes (NHRI). All mice were used according to the protocols and guidelines approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee of NHRI. Floxed AhR mice (JAX 006203), IL-17A–
deficient mice (JAX 016879), floxed ROR t mice (JAX 008771), and
floxed IKK   mice (EMMA 001921) were purchased from the Jackson
Laboratory (JAX) or the European Mouse Mutant Archive (EMMA).
The three aforementioned mouse lines were backcrossed for 10 generations onto the C57BL/6 background. The data presented in this
study were performed on sex-matched, 4- to 26-week-old littermates.
For T cell development analyses, 5-week-old, sex-matched mice were
used. All mice used in this study were maintained in temperaturecontrolled and pathogen-free cages.
Generation of Lck-GLK Tg mice and PKC KO mice
A full-length human GLK coding sequence was placed downstream
of the proximal Lck promoter (fig. S1A). Lck-GLK Tg mice in C57BL/6
background were generated using pronuclear microinjection by
NHRI Transgenic Mouse Core. Two independent Lck-GLK Tg mouse
lines were used. Lck-GLK Tg mouse line #1 was used in all the Lck-GLK
Tg experiments, except for the studies in figs. S1B and S2E, in which
Lck-GLK Tg mouse line #2 was used. PKC KO mice were generated
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
12 of 15
by TALEN-mediated gene targeting (fig. S7, A to C); the nucleotides
5′-GGTGGAACACTAAAAATAATATGTCTTAGAGCCCCATACATACAGTGTTTGTCTTTTGTCATTTTTCTAGGGAACAACCATGTCACCGTTTC-3′ of the PKC intron 1 and exon 2
were deleted in the mutated allele. For TALEN-mediated gene targeting in mice, embryo microinjection of TALEN mRNA was performed by NHRI Transgenic Mouse Core.
Cells
Human Jurkat T leukemia cells [American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC), TIB-152] were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen) containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS; Invitrogen) plus penicillin (10 U/ml)
and streptomycin (10 mg/ml) (Invitrogen). HEK293T cells (ATCC,
CRL-11268) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(Invitrogen) containing 10% FCS plus penicillin (10 U/ml) and streptomycin (10 mg/ml). All cell lines used were tested and confirmed to
be negative for mycoplasma. Primary murine T cells were negatively
selected from the spleen, lymph nodes, or peripheral bloods of mice
using magnetically coupled antibodies against CD11b, B220, CD49b,
CD235, and TER-119 [magnetic cell separation kit (Miltenyi Biotec)].
To induce IL-17A production of 3-day–cultured T cells (Fig. 1E), the
primary T cells were stimulated with biotin-conjugated anti-CD3
antibodies (3 g/ml) plus streptavidin (3 g/ml) for 3 hours at 37°C.
Reagents and antibodies
GLK antibody (–GLK-N) was generated by immunization of rabbits
with peptides (murine GLK epitope: 4
GFDLSRRNPQEDFELI19; identical to human GLK protein sequences 4 to 19) and was used for Figs. 2E,
3 (D and E), and 4F. Anti-GLK monoclonal antibody (clone C3) was
generated by immunization of mice with peptides (murine GLK epitope: 514EQRGTNLSRKEKKDVPKPI533) and was used for Fig. 3 (F and I)
and fig. S5D. The antibody for phosphorylated ROR t Ser489 was generated by immunization of a rabbit with phosphopeptides (murine
ROR t epitope: 483FSTDVE[pS]PEGLSK495). Anti-Myc (clone 9E10),
anti-Flag (clone M2), and anti-HA (clone 12CA5) antibodies were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Anti–p-AhR (Ser36; #A0765) antibody was
purchased from Assay Biotechnology. Anti-AhR (clone RPT9), anti–
p-IKK   (Ser180/181; #ab55341), and anti-GAPDH (clone mAbcam 9484,
catalog #ab9482) antibodies were purchased from Abcam. Anti-PKC
(#3551-1) and anti-actin (clone E184) antibodies were purchased from
Epitomics. Anti–p-PKC (Thr538; #ab63365), anti–p-STAT3 (Tyr705;
clone D3A7), anti-IKK (#2682), anti-IKK   (#2678), anti–p-SGK1
(Thr256; #2939), anti-SGK1 (clone D27C11), anti-histone 3 (#9715S),
anti-IRF4 (#4964S), and anti-BATF (#8638S) antibodies were purchased
from Cell Signaling Technology. Anti-STAT3 (#06-596) and antiROR t (clone 6F3.1) antibodies were purchased from Millipore. AntiKLF4 (#AF3158) and anti–IL-23 receptor (#bs-1460) antibodies were
purchased from R&D Systems and Bioss Antibodies, respectively.
Plasmids and recombinant proteins
The expression plasmids for GLK and GLK kinase-dead mutant
(GLK-K45E) were reported previously (22). CFP-tagged PKC,
yellow fluorescent protein (YFP)–tagged AhR, Myc-tagged PKC,
HA-tagged AhR, and Flag-tagged PKC plasmids were constructed
by subcloning individual complementary DNAs into pCMV6-
AC-CFP, pCMV6-AC-YFP, pCMV6-AC-Myc, pCMV6-AC-HA,
or pCMV6-AC-Flag vector (OriGene Technologies). HA-tagged
AhR-S36A mutant and Myc-tagged PKC-K409W (kinase-dead)
mutant plasmids were generated by site-directed mutagenesis. GSTtagged PKC and GST-tagged PKC-K409W plasmids were also
individually constructed by subcloning into pGEX-4T vector. The
human GLK shRNA (5′-GTGCCACTTAGAATGTTTGAAA-3′)
was obtained from the National RNAi Core Facility (Taiwan) and
subcloned into pSUPER-GFP vector (Oligoengine). The IL-17A
reporter plasmid was a gift from W. Strober (Addgene plasmid
#20124) (28). The IL-17A promoter constructs containing a mutated
binding element for AhR, ROR t (−877), ROR t (−120), or STAT3
were generated by site-directed mutagenesis using Fusion DNA
polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The following primers were used for mutagenesis
(mutated binding elements are underlined and italicized; mutated
nucleotides are shown in bold font): AhR-binding site (18), 5′-ATGTCCATACATACATGATACTGAATCACAGC-3′; ROR t-binding
site (−887) (28), 5′-CTCAAAGACATAAAGGCAACCGTGATCTCATGGAGAGGAGAG-3′; ROR t-binding site (−120), 5′-GGTTCTGTGCTGCAATCATTTGAGG-3′ (11); and STAT3-binding site
(56), 5′-AGACAGATGTTGCCTGTCATAAAGGGGTGGTT-3′.
The mutant constructs were verified by DNA sequencing. The
plasmids pGL4.43-Luc2P-XRE (AhR-response XRE-Luc), pGL4.47-
Luc2P-SIE (STAT3-responsive SIE-Luc), pGL4.32–Luc2P–NF- B–
RE–Hygro, and pGL4 luciferase reporter vector were purchased from
Promega. The plasmid for the ROR t (−877) response element–driven
reporter was constructed by cloning four copies of the ROR t (−877)
response element into the pGL4.43 luciferase reporter vector. For in vitro
binding assays, purified AhR proteins were isolated from HA-AhR–
transfected HEK293T cells, followed by HA-peptide elution. Purified
recombinant GST-PKC and GST-IKK   proteins were purchased from
SignalChem. Purified recombinant 6×His-ROR  proteins were purchased from MyBioSource. Recombinant proteins of GST-tagged PKC
K409W proteins were isolated from Escherichia coli (BL21) and then
purified by GST pulldown assays. Purified Flag-tagged ROR t protein was immunoprecipitated and then eluted with Flag peptides
from lysates of HEK293T cells that were cotransfected with FlagROR t plus either CFP-IKK   or vector. Purified recombinant protein of GST-tagged AhR was purchased from Abnova.
Luciferase reporter assays
The 2-kb IL-17A promoter–driven firefly luciferase reporter plasmid
and a Renilla luciferase control plasmid (pRL-TK) were cotransfected
into Jurkat T cells. After 24 hours, 1 × 106
 cells were harvested,
washed with phosphate-buffered saline, and resuspended in 60 l of
RPMI 1640 plus 60 l of lysis buffer. Data represent the mean of the
ratios of the firefly luciferase activity to the Renilla luciferase activity.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
Serum levels of IL-1  , IL-4, IL-6, IL-12, IL-17F, IL-21, IL-22, IL-23,
IFN- , TNF-, and TGF-   were analyzed by individual ELISA kits
purchased from eBioscience. The IL-17A levels were determined
using an ELISA kit from BioLegend. The serum levels of ANAs,
anti-dsDNA antibody, and RF were analyzed by ELISA kits purchased from Alpha Diagnostic International.
ALPHA technology
ALPHA technology/protein-protein interaction assays were performed
according to the manufacturer’s protocol from PerkinElmer Life Sciences, as described in a previous publication (57). When the proteindonor pair was within 200 nm, a luminescent signal was detected by an
EnVision 2104 Multilabel Plate Reader (PerkinElmer Life Sciences).
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
13 of 15
FRET assays
FRET signal in live cells was detected by an EnVision 2104 Multilabel
Plate Reader (PerkinElmer Life Sciences). The reaction was excited by
light passing through a 430-nm filter (with 8 nm bandwidth), and the
intensity of emitted fluorescence passing through a 530-nm filter (with
8 nm bandwidth) was recorded. If the protein-protein pair was in close
proximity (1 to 10 nm), a 530-nm signal would be detected. The FRET
efficiency was calculated by a formula, efficiency = (1 − FDA/FD) ×
100% (where FDA is the relative fluorescence intensities of the donor
in the presence of the acceptor and FD is the relative fluorescence
intensities of the donor in the absence of the acceptor).
In situ PLA
PLAs were performed using the Duolink In Situ Red Starter kit
(Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, cells were incubated with rabbit or mouse primary antibodies for each molecule pair (AhR plus PKC, AhR plus ROR t,
or Flag plus Myc), followed by species-specific secondary antibodies conjugated with oligonucleotides (PLA probes). After
ligation and amplification reactions, the PLA signals from each
pair of PLA probes in close proximity (<40 nm) were visualized as
individual red dots by a fluorescence microscope (Leica DM2500)
or a confocal microscope (Leica TCS SP5 II). Each red dot represents
a direct interaction.
ChIP assays
Peripheral blood T cells of mice were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature. The lysates were sonicated
(3 × 9 s) on ice to generate 200– to 1000–base pair DNA fragments.
The cell extracts were immunoprecipitated with 5 g of anti-ROR t,
anti-AhR, or anti-STAT3 antibodies plus protein G Dynabeads
(Invitrogen) for 4 hours at 4°C on a rotating wheel. After washing
three times, immunocomplexes were incubated at 94°C for 15 min
for reverse cross-linking and then treated with protease K. The
DNA fragments were purified using a PCR purification kit (GE
Healthcare) and subjected to PCR for 35 cycles. The primers for the
IL-17A promoter containing the ROR t-binding sites (−877 to
−872) (28) and (−120 to −115) (11), AhR-binding site (−254 to
−249) (18), STAT3-binding site (−150 to −145) (56), IRF4-binding
site (−429 to −421) (14), KLF4-binding site (−1097 to −1083)
(16), or BATF (−243 to −176) (15) were as follows: ROR t (−877
to −872), 5′-CTGAAGAGCTGGGACCTAATG-3′ (forward)
and 5′-GACTACTAACAGGAGGAGATG-3′ (reverse); ROR t
(−120 to −115), 5′-GGTTCTGTGCTGACCTCATTTGAG-3′
(forward) and 5′-CACAGATGAAGCTCTCCCTGG-3′ (reverse);
AhR, 5′-GAGACTCACAAACCATTACTATG-3′ (forward)
and 5′-CACAGATGAAGCTCTCCCTGG-3′ (reverse); STAT3,
5′-GAGACTCACAAACCATTACTATG-3′ (forward) and
5′-CACAGATGAAGCTCTCCCTGG-3′ (reverse); IRF4, 5′-GGGCAAGGGATGCTCTCTAG-3′ (forward) and 5′-CTGAAGCTGCTGCAGAGCTG-3′ (reverse); KLF4, 5′-GGGTATTATCCCAAGGGTATCC-3′ (forward) and 5′-ATGCAGCATGAGGTGGACCGAT-3′
(reverse); BATF, 5′-GAACTTCTGCCCTTCCCATCT-3′ (forward)
and 5′-CAGCACAGAACCACCCCTTT-3′ (reverse).
Immunoprecipitation, GST/His pulldown, and
immunoblotting analyses
Immunoprecipitation was performed by preincubation of 0.5 to
1 mg of protein lysates with 1 g of antibody for 1 hour at 4°C, followed by the addition of 20 l of protein A/G Sepharose beads for
3 hours. For GST and His pulldown assays, GST- and His-tagged proteins plus their interacting proteins were incubated for 3 hours with
glutathione Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) and Ni Sepharose beads
(GE Healthcare), respectively. The immunocomplexes or GST/His
pulldown complexes were washed with lysis buffer (1.5 mM MgCl2,
0.2% NP-40, 125 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 25 mM NaF, 50 mM trisHCl, and 1 mM Na3VO4) three times at 4°C, followed by boiling in
5× loading buffer at 95°C for 3 min. The immunoblotting analyses
were performed as described previously (57).
Cell transfections, T cell stimulation, in vitro kinase assays
for PKC or IKK  , and flow cytometric analyses
These experiments were performed as described previously (24).
Immunofluorescence and confocal imaging
Cells were fixed in cold methanol for 2 min. After permeation with
0.25% Triton X-100 for 1 hour, the cells were blocked with 5%
bovine serum albumin for 2 hours. The cells were incubated with
primary antibodies (1:200 dilution) for 24 hours and then with
secondary antibodies (1:500 dilution) for 2 hours. The secondary
antibodies donkey anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG)–Alexa Fluor
568 and goat anti-mouse IgG–Alexa Fluor 488 were purchased from
Abcam and Life Technologies, respectively. The cover slides were
mounted in Fluoroshield with DAPI (GeneTex) and analyzed using
a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope.
In vitro T cell differentiation assays
CD4+
 splenic T cells were purified from mice. Cells (5 × 105
) were
cultured in 1 ml of RPMI 1640 in 48-well plates coated with antiCD3 (2 g/ml) and anti-CD28 (3 g/ml) antibodies. For TH17 differentiation, splenic CD4+
 cells were cultured in the medium containing
IL-23 recombinant proteins (50 ng/ml; R&D Systems), IL-6 recombinant proteins (20 ng/ml; R&D Systems), TGF-   recombinant proteins (5 ng/ml; R&D Systems), and anti–IL-4 (5 g/ml; BioLegend)
and anti–IFN-  (5 g/ml; BioLegend) antibodies. For TH1 differentiation, CD4+
 splenic cells were cultured in the medium containing
IL-12 recombinant proteins (5 ng/ml; R&D Systems) and anti–IL-4
antibodies (1 g/ml; BioLegend).
Liquid chromatography–MS
After in vitro kinase assays, protein bands of Flag-tagged ROR t were
collected from InstantBlue (GeneMark)–stained SDS–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis gels. Proteins were digested with trypsin and subjected to liquid chromatography–MS/MS analyses by an LTQ Orbitrap
Elite hybrid mass spectrometer as described previously (57).
Statistical analyses
All experiments were repeated at least three times. Data are means ±
SEM. The statistical significance between two unpaired groups was
analyzed using two-tailed Student’s t test. P values of less than 0.05
were considered statistically significant.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/4/9/eaat5401/DC1
Fig. S1. Normal T cell and B cell development in Lck-GLK Tg mice.
Fig. S2. Inflammatory phenotypes and enhanced TH17 differentiation in Lck-GLK Tg mice.
Fig. S3. Autoimmune responses in Lck-GLK Tg mice are abolished by IL-17A deficiency.
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
14 of 15
Fig. S4. GLK transgene does not regulate IL-23 receptor expression, STAT3 phosphorylation,
and ROR t-binding element at the −120 region of the IL-17A promoter.
Fig. S5. PKC controls Ser36 phosphorylation–mediated AhR nuclear translocation and
AhR-mediated autoimmune responses.
Fig. S6. PKC directly interacts with AhR in the cytoplasm of Lck-GLK T cells.
Fig. S7. Autoimmune responses in Lck-GLK Tg mice are reduced by PKC KO.
Fig. S8. TCR signaling induces in vivo interaction between AhR and ROR t.
Fig. S9. Schematic model of AhR/ROR t-mediated IL-17A transcription in T cells of Lck-GLK Tg
mice with different gene-KO backgrounds.
Table S1. Transcription factors of NF- B–mediated cytokines.
References (58, 59)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. D. D. Patel, V. K. Kuchroo, Th17 cell pathway in human immunity: Lessons from genetics
and therapeutic interventions. Immunity 43, 1040–1051 (2015).
2. S. L. Gaffen, R. Jain, A. V. Garg, D. J. Cua, The IL-23–IL-17 immune axis: From mechanisms
to therapeutic testing. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 585–600 (2014).
3. S. Kotake, N. Udagawa, N. Takahashi, K. Matsuzaki, K. Itoh, S. Ishiyama, S. Saito, K. Inoue,
N. Kamatani, M. T. Gillespie, T. J. Martin, T. Suda, IL-17 in synovial fluids from patients with
rheumatoid arthritis is a potent stimulator of osteoclastogenesis. J. Clin. Invest. 103,
1345–1352 (1999).
4. M. Mitsdoerffer, Y. Lee, A. Jäger, H.-J. Kim, T. Korn, J. K. Kolls, H. Cantor, E. Bettelli,
V. K. Kuchroo, Proinflammatory T helper type 17 cells are effective B-cell helpers.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 14292–14297 (2010).
5. H. Park, Z. Li, X. O. Yang, S. H. Chang, R. Nurieva, Y.-H. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Hood, Z. Zhu,
Q. Tian, C. Dong, A distinct lineage of CD4 T cells regulates tissue inflammation by
producing interleukin 17. Nat. Immunol. 6, 1133–1141 (2005).
6. I. I. Ivanov, L. Zhou, D. R. Littman, Transcriptional regulation of Th17 cell differentiation.
Semin. Immunol. 19, 409–417 (2007).
7. C. Dong, TH17 cells in development: An updated view of their molecular identity and
genetic programming. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8, 337–348 (2008).
8. X. O. Yang, R. Nurieva, G. J. Martinez, H. S. Kang, Y. Chung, B. P. Pappu, B. Shah,
S. H. Chang, K. S. Schluns, S. S. Watowich, X.-H. Feng, A. M. Jetten, C. Dong, Molecular
antagonism and plasticity of regulatory and inflammatory T cell programs. Immunity 29,
44–56 (2008).
9. I. I. Ivanov, B. S. McKenzie, L. Zhou, C. E. Tadokoro, A. Lepelley, J. J. Lafaille, D. J. Cua,
D. R. Littman, The orphan nuclear receptor ROR t directs the differentiation program of
proinflammatory IL-17+
 T helper cells. Cell 126, 1121–1133 (2006).
10. L. Zhou, J. E. Lopes, M. M. W. Chong, I. I. Ivanov, R. Min, G. D. Victora, Y. Shen, J. Du,
Y. P. Rubtsov, A. Y. Rudensky, S. F. Ziegler, D. R. Littman, TGF-  -induced Foxp3 inhibits
TH17 cell differentiation by antagonizing ROR t function. Nature 453, 236–240 (2008).
11. K. Ichiyama, H. Yoshida, Y. Wakabayashi, T. Chinen, K. Saeki, M. Nakaya, G. Takaesu,
S. Hori, A. Yoshimura, T. Kobayashi, Foxp3 inhibits ROR t-mediated IL-17A mRNA
transcription through direct interaction with ROR t. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 17003–17008
(2008).
12. Z. Chen, A. Laurence, Y. Kanno, M. Pacher-Zavisin, B.-M. Zhu, C. Tato, A. Yoshimura,
L. Hennighausen, J. J. O’Shea, Selective regulatory function of Socs3 in the formation of
IL-17-secreting T cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 8137–8142 (2006).
13. D. M. Floss, S. Mrotzek, T. Klöcker, J. Schröder, J. Grötzinger, S. Rose-John, J. Scheller,
Identification of canonical tyrosine-dependent and non-canonical tyrosine-independent
STAT3 activation sites in the intracellular domain of the interleukin 23 receptor.
J. Biol. Chem. 288, 19386–19400 (2013).
14. P. S. Biswas, S. Gupta, E. Chang, L. Song, R. A. Stirzaker, J. K. Liao, G. Bhagat, A. B. Pernis,
Phosphorylation of IRF4 by ROCK2 regulates IL-17 and IL-21 production and the
development of autoimmunity in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 3280–3295 (2010).
15. B. U. Schraml, K. Hildner, W. Ise, W.-L. Lee, W. A.-E. Smith, B. Solomon, G. Sahota, J. Sim,
R. Mukasa, S. Cemerski, R. D. Hatton, G. D. Stormo, C. T. Weaver, J. H. Russell, T. L. Murphy,
K. M. Murphy, The AP-1 transcription factor Batf controls TH17 differentiation. Nature 460,
405–409 (2009).
16. L. Lebson, A. Gocke, J. Rosenzweig, J. Alder, C. Civin, P. A. Calabresi, K. A. Whartenby,
Cutting edge: The transcription factor Kruppel-like factor 4 regulates the differentiation
of Th17 cells independently of ROR t. J. Immunol. 185, 7161–7164 (2010).
17. M. Veldhoen, K. Hirota, A. M. Westendorf, J. Buer, L. Dumoutier, J.-C. Renauld,
B. Stockinger, The aryl hydrocarbon receptor links TH17-cell-mediated autoimmunity to
environmental toxins. Nature 453, 106–109 (2008).
18. G. Cui, X. Qin, L. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Sheng, Q. Yu, H. Sheng, B. Xi, J. Z. Zhang, Y. Q. Zang,
Liver X receptor (LXR) mediates negative regulation of mouse and human Th17
differentiation. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 658–670 (2011).
19. A. Kimura, T. Naka, K. Nohara, Y. Fujii-Kuriyama, T. Kishimoto, Aryl hydrocarbon receptor
regulates Stat1 activation and participates in the development of Th17 cells. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 9721–9726 (2008).
20. W. Niedbala, J. C. Alves-Filho, S. Y. Fukada, S. M. Vieira, A. Mitani, F. Sonego,
A. Mirchandani, D. C. Nascimento, F. Q. Cunha, F. Y. Liew, Regulation of type 17 helper
T-cell function by nitric oxide during inflammation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,
9220–9225 (2011).
21. J. Geginat, M. Paroni, S. Maglie, J. S. Alfen, I. Kastirr, P. Gruarin, M. De Simone,
M. Pagani, S. Abrignani, Plasticity of human CD4 T cell subsets. Front. Immunol. 5, 630
(2014).
22. K. Diener, X. S. Wang, C. Chen, C. F. Meyer, G. Keesler, M. Zukowski, T.-H. Tan, Z. Yao,
Activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway by a novel protein kinase related to
human germinal center kinase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 9687–9692 (1997).
23. H.-C. Chuang, X. Wang, T.-H. Tan, MAP4K family kinases in immunity and inflammation.
Adv. Immunol. 129, 277–314 (2016).
24. H.-C. Chuang, J.-L. Lan, D.-Y. Chen, C.-Y. Yang, Y.-M. Chen, J.-P. Li, C.-Y. Huang, P.-E. Liu,
X. Wang, T.-H. Tan, The kinase GLK controls autoimmunity and NF- B signaling by
activating the kinase PKC- in T cells. Nat. Immunol. 12, 1113–1118 (2011).
25. D.-Y. Chen, H.-C. Chuang, J.-L. Lan, Y.-M. Chen, W.-T. Hung, K.-L. Lai, T.-H. Tan, Germinal
center kinase-like kinase (GLK/MAP4K3) expression is increased in adult-onset Still’s
disease and may act as an activity marker. BMC Med. 10, 84 (2012).
26. Y.-M. Chen, H.-C. Chuang, W.-C. Lin, C.-Y. Tsai, C.-W. Wu, N.-R. Gong, W.-T. Hung, T.-H. Lan,
J.-L. Lan, T.-H. Tan, D.-Y. Chen, Germinal center kinase-like kinase overexpression in
T cells as a novel biomarker in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 65, 2573–2582
(2013).
27. R. Jain, Y. Chen, Y. Kanno, B. Joyce-Shaikh, G. Vahedi, K. Hirahara, W. M. Blumenschein,
S. Sukumar, C. J. Haines, S. Sadekova, T. K. McClanahan, M. J. McGeachy, J. J. O’Shea,
D. J. Cua, Interleukin-23-induced transcription factor blimp-1 promotes pathogenicity of
T helper 17 cells. Immunity 44, 131–142 (2016).
28. F. Zhang, G. Meng, W. Strober, Interactions among the transcription factors Runx1, ROR t
and Foxp3 regulate the differentiation of interleukin 17-producing T cells. Nat. Immunol.
9, 1297–1306 (2008).
29. T. Ikuta, Y. Kobayashi, K. Kawajiri, Phosphorylation of nuclear localization signal inhibits
the ligand-dependent nuclear import of aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 317, 545–550 (2004).
30. C. Wu, N. Yosef, T. Thalhamer, C. Zhu, S. Xiao, Y. Kishi, A. Regev, V. K. Kuchroo, Induction
of pathogenic TH17 cells by inducible salt-sensing kinase SGK1. Nature 496, 513–517
(2013).
31. X. K. Liu, J. L. Clements, S. L. Gaffen, Signaling through the murine T cell receptor induces
IL-17 production in the absence of costimulation, IL-23 or dendritic cells. Mol. Cells 20,
339–347 (2005).
32. J. Gomez-Rodriguez, N. Sahu, R. Handon, T. S. Davidson, S. M. Anderson, M. R. Kirby,
A. August, P. L. Schwartzberg, Differential expression of IL-17A and IL-17F is coupled to
TCR signaling via Itk-mediated regulation of NFATc1. Immunity 31, 587–597 (2009).
33. N. Manel, D. Unutmaz, D. R. Littman, The differentiation of human TH-17 cells requires
transforming growth factor-   and induction of the nuclear receptor ROR t. Nat. Immunol.
9, 641–649 (2008).
34. N. Yosef, A. K. Shalek, J. T. Gaublomme, H. Jin, Y. Lee, A. Awasthi, C. Wu, K. Karwacz,
S. Xiao, M. Jorgolli, D. Gennert, R. Satija, A. Shakya, D. Y. Lu, J. J. Trombetta, M. R. Pillai,
P. J. Ratcliffe, M. L. Coleman, M. Bix, D. Tantin, H. Park, V. K. Kuchroo, A. Regev,
Dynamic regulatory network controlling TH17 cell differentiation. Nature 496,
461–468 (2013).
35. Q. Ruan, V. Kameswaran, Y. Zhang, S. Zheng, J. Sun, J. Wang, J. DeVirgiliis, H.-C. Liou,
A. A. Beg, Y. H. Chen, The Th17 immune response is controlled by the Rel–ROR –ROR T
transcriptional axis. J. Exp. Med. 208, 2321–2333 (2011).
36. J. Yang, P. Xu, L. Han, Z. Guo, X. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Nie, S. Yin, M. Piccioni, A. Tsun, L. Lv,
S. Ge, B. Li, Cutting edge: Ubiquitin-specific protease 4 promotes Th17 cell function
under inflammation by deubiquitinating and stabilizing ROR t. J. Immunol. 194,
4094–4097 (2015).
37. E. Zhu, X. Wang, B. Zheng, Q. Wang, J. Hao, S. Chen, Q. Zhao, L. Zhao, Z. Wu, Z. Yin,
miR-20b suppresses Th17 differentiation and the pathogenesis of experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis by targeting ROR t and STAT3. J. Immunol. 192,
5599–5609 (2014).
38. Q. Wu, J. Nie, Y. Gao, P. Xu, Q. Sun, J. Yang, L. Han, Z. Chen, X. Wang, L. Lv, A. Tsun, J. Shen,
B. Li, Reciprocal regulation of ROR t acetylation and function by p300 and HDAC1.
Sci. Rep. 5, 16355 (2015).
39. A. Yeste, I. D. Mascanfroni, M. Nadeau, E. J. Burns, A.-M. Tukpah, A. Santiago, C. Wu,
B. Patel, D. Kumar, F. J. Quintana, IL-21 induces IL-22 production in CD4+
 T cells.
Nat. Commun. 5, 3753 (2014).
40. M. Lochner, L. Peduto, M. Cherrier, S. Sawa, F. Langa, R. Varona, D. Riethmacher,
M. Si-Tahar, J. P. Di Santo, G. Eberl, In vivo equilibrium of proinflammatory IL-17+
 and
regulatory IL-10+
 Foxp3+
 ROR t
+
 T cells. J. Exp. Med. 205, 1381–1393 (2008).
41. Z. He, F. Wang, J. Ma, S. Sen, J. Zhang, Y. Gwack, Y. Zhou, Z. Sun, Ubiquitination of ROR t
at lysine 446 limits Th17 differentiation by controlling coactivator recruitment.
J. Immunol. 197, 1148–1158 (2016).
 on September 18, 2020 http://advances.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
Chuang et al., Sci. Adv. 2018; 4 : eaat5401 12 September 2018
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
15 of 15
42. Z. He, J. Ma, R. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Huang, F. Wang, S. Sen, E. V. Rothenberg, Z. Sun,
A two-amino-acid substitution in the transcription factor ROR t disrupts its function in TH17
differentiation but not in thymocyte development. Nat. Immunol. 18, 1128–1138 (2017).
43. D. J. McGuire, A. L. Rowse, H. Li, B. J. Peng, C. M. Sestero, K. S. Cashman, P. De Sarno,
C. Raman, CD5 enhances Th17-cell differentiation by regulating IFN-  response and
ROR t localization. Eur. J. Immunol. 44, 1137–1142 (2014).
44. P. R. Taylor, S. Roy, S. M. Leal Jr., Y. Sun, S. J. Howell, B. A. Cobb, X. Li, E. Pearlman,
Activation of neutrophils by autocrine IL-17A–IL-17RC interactions during fungal infection
is regulated by IL-6, IL-23, ROR t and dectin-2. Nat. Immunol. 15, 143–151 (2014).
45. F. J. Quintana, A. S. Basso, A. H. Iglesias, T. Korn, M. F. Farez, E. Bettelli, M. Caccamo,
M. Oukka, H. L. Weiner, Control of Treg and TH17 cell differentiation by the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor. Nature 453, 65–71 (2008).
46. P. P. Ho, L. Steinman, The aryl hydrocarbon receptor: A regulator of Th17 and Treg cell
development in disease. Cell Res. 18, 605–608 (2008).
47. M. Veldhoen, K. Hirota, J. Christensen, A. O’Garra, B. Stockinger, Natural agonists for aryl
hydrocarbon receptor in culture medium are essential for optimal differentiation of Th17
T cells. J. Exp. Med. 206, 43–49 (2009).
48. N. Hermann-Kleiter, G. Baier, NFAT pulls the strings during CD4+
 T helper cell effector
functions. Blood 115, 2989–2997 (2010).
49. A. Schmidt, N. Oberle, P. H. Krammer, Molecular mechanisms of Treg-mediated T cell
suppression. Front. Immunol. 3, 51 (2012).
50. S. Krishna, D. Xie, B. Gorentla, J. Shin, J. Gao, X.-P. Zhong, Chronic activation of the kinase
IKK   impairs T cell function and survival. J. Immunol. 189, 1209–1219 (2012).
51. I. Backert, S. B. Koralov, S. Wirtz, V. Kitowski, U. Billmeier, E. Martini, K. Hofmann, K. Hildner,
N. Wittkopf, K. Brecht, M. Waldner, K. Rajewsky, M. F. Neurath, C. Becker, C. Neufert, STAT3
activation in Th17 and Th22 cells controls IL-22-mediated epithelial host defense during
infectious colitis. J. Immunol. 193, 3779–3791 (2014).
52. L. Wei, A. Laurence, K. M. Elias, J. J. O’Shea, IL-21 is produced by Th17 cells and drives
IL-17 production in a STAT3-dependent manner. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 34605–34610 (2007).
53. R. Nurieva, X. O. Yang, G. Martinez, Y. Zhang, A. D. Panopoulos, L. Ma, K. Schluns, Q. Tian,
S. S. Watowich, A. M. Jetten, C. Dong, Essential autocrine regulation by IL-21 in the
generation of inflammatory T cells. Nature 448, 480–483 (2007).
54. C. P. Hsu, H. C. Chuang, M. C. Lee, H. H. Tsou, L. W. Lee, J. P. Li, T. H. Tan, GLK/MAP4K3
overexpression associates with recurrence risk for non-small cell lung cancer. Oncotarget
7, 41748–41757 (2016).
55. C. H. Ho, H. C. Chuang, I. C. Wu, H. W. Tsai, Y. J. Lin, H. Y. Sun, K. C. Young, Y. C. Chiu,
P. N. Cheng, W. C. Liu, T. H. Tan, T. T. Chang, Prediction of early hepatocellular carcinoma
recurrence using germinal center kinase-like kinase. Oncotarget 7, 49765–49776 (2016).
56. R. M. Thomas, H. Sai, A. D. Wells, Conserved intergenic elements and DNA methylation
cooperate to regulate transcription at the il17 locus. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 25049–25059 (2012).
57. H.-C. Chuang, W. H.-H. Sheu, Y.-T. Lin, C.-Y. Tsai, C.-Y. Yang, Y.-J. Cheng, P.-Y. Huang,
J.-P. Li, L.-L. Chiu, X. Wang, M. Xie, M. D. Schneider, T.-H. Tan, HGK/MAP4K4 deficiency
induces TRAF2 stabilization and Th17 differentiation leading to insulin resistance.
Nat. Commun. 5, 4602 (2014).
58. E. Serfling, F. Berberich-Siebelt, S. Chuvpilo, E. Jankevics, S. Klein-Hessling, T. Twardzik,
A. Avots, The role of NF-AT transcription factors in T cell activation and differentiation.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1498, 1–18 (2000).
59. S. J. Szabo, S. T. Kim, G. L. Costa, X. Zhang, C. G. Fathman, L. H. Glimcher, A novel
transcription factor, T-bet, directs Th1 lineage commitment. Cell 100, 655–669 (2000).
Acknowledgments: We thank the Transgenic Mouse Core (NHRI, Taiwan) for generation of Tg
and KO mice. We thank the core facilities of NHRI (Taiwan) for tissue sectioning/H&E staining
and confocal microscopy. We thank the Laboratory Animal Center (AAALAC-accredited) of
NHRI for mouse housing. We thank the Institute of Biological Chemistry of Academia Sinica for
MS. Funding: This work was supported by grants from NHRI, Taiwan (IM-105-PP-01 and
IM-105-SP-01 to T.-H.T.) and the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (MOST-106-
2321-B-400-013 to T.-H.T.). T.-H.T. is a Taiwan Bio-Development Foundation Chair in
Biotechnology. Author contributions: H.-C.C. designed and performed experiments, analyzed
and interpreted data, and wrote the manuscript. C.-Y.T. and C.-H.H. performed experiments
and assisted in data interpretation. T.-H.T. conceived the study, supervised experiments, and
wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: A provisional patent related to this work has
been filed by NHRI with U.S. Patent Office, application no. 62719416. H.-C.C. and T.-H.T. are
inventors of this application. The authors declare that they have no other competing interests.
Data and materials availability: Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to T.-H.T. (ttan@nhri.org.tw). All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the
paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to
this paper may be requested from the authors.