Presence of Magnetic Fluids Leads to the Inhibition
of Insulin Amyloid Aggregation
Z. Gazovaa,∗
, K. Siposovaa,b, M. Konerackaa
, A. Antosovaa
, V. Zavisovaa
,
M. Kubovcikovaa
, D. Fedunovaa
, J. Bagelovaa
, N. Tomasovicovaa
,
Z. Daxnerovac and P. Kopcanskya
a
Institute of Experimental Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Kosice, Slovakia
bDepartment of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Safarik University, Kosice, Slovakia
c
Institute of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, Safarik University, Kosice, Slovakia
Insulin amyloid aggregation caused serious problems in the treatment of diabetes by insulin injection or by
insulin pumps. In vitro formation of insulin amyloid brils was investigated in presence of several types of magnetic
uids. Interaction of magnetic uids with insulin amyloid aggregates led to decrease of insulin brillization. The
inhibiting activities are aected by coating layer of studied magnetic uids as well as by their physical properties
(diameter, concentration of magnetic particles). The highest inhibiting eciencies were detected for sterically
stabilized magnetic uids in saline solution (75%) and for magnetic uids modied by dextran (80%).
PACS: 87.14.em, 47.65.Cb, 87.85.jj
1. Introduction
Amyloid aggregation of proteins is related to incurable
human amyloidosis, such as Alzheimer's and Huntington's diseases, prion-related diseases and diabetes type II.
The common feature of amyloid diseases is presence
of amyloid deposits in various parts of body consisting
mainly of aggregated poly/peptide typical for given disease [1]. The precise mechanisms by which the normally
soluble proteins forms amyloid aggregates (oligomers,
pores, ordered brils) is unknown, however, it is generally accepted that presence of amyloid deposits in different tissues has toxic consequence to various cell types
leading to their dysfunction or death [2].
In the past few years the inhibiting activity was detected for heat shock proteins, short peptides, antibodies, surfactants and small molecules [3, 4]. Several types
of nanoparticles were identied as intensive inhibitors
of amyloid aggregation. Recently, we have found that
Fe3O4 based magnetic nanoparticles prevent lysozyme
amyloid brillization [5].
We concern our study to investigate the ability of four
magnetic uids (MFs) to aect the insulin amyloid aggregation. We have found that studied magnetic uids
inhibit insulin polymerization dierently in dependence
on MF's properties.
2. Experimental
The magnetic particles were prepared by co-
-precipitation using ferric and ferrous salts in ammonium
∗ corresponding author; e-mail: gazova@saske.sk
hydroxide. The magnetic nanoparticles were stabilized
electrostatically with perchloric acid (MF1) or sterically
with sodium oleate (MF2MF4) and dispersed in water
(MF1, MF2 and MF3) or in physiological saline solution
(MF4). Magnetic nanoparticles were functionalized by
bovine serum albumin (BSA) (MF2) or dextran (MF3),
which were added during stirring and then heating up to
50 ◦C in the w/w ratio BSA/Fe3O4 = 0.35 and dextran/
Fe3O4 = 0.5, respectively.
Hydrodynamic diameter of the prepared magnetic uids, considering the magnetic core and the coating layer of
BSA or dextran were determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a Zetasizer Nano-ZS from Malvern
Instrument. To characterize the morphology and microstructure of magnetic uids the scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL 7000F microscope) was used.
Insulin amyloid brils were prepared by incubation
(120 min) of 58 µg/ml human insulin (10 µM) at 65 ◦C
under constant stirring in 100 mM NaCl, pH 1.6 (for
MF1 and MF2) and in 50 mM phosphate buer solution,
pH 7.5 (for MF3 and MF4). The formation of insulin aggregates was monitored by Thioavin (ThT) uorescence
assay and by transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
ThT assay is sensitive to the binding of ThT to amyloid brils accompanied with signicant enhancement of
ThT uorescence which is not observed for native protein. Fluorescence intensity was measured by spectrouorimeter Shimadzu RF-5000. The excitation was set at
440 nm and the emission recorded at 485 nm. The TEM
images were obtained by Tesla BS 500 operating at 60 kV.
The eect of MFs on insulin brillization was investigated by adding the magnetic uid to the soluble insulin
(10 µM) before starting the process of amyloid aggregation (described above). The inuence of MFs on the
(1305)
1306 Z. Gazova et al.
insulin polymerization was observed at two w/w ratios
of insulin (Ins) and magnetite component of MF, namely
for ratios Ins:MF = 1:1 and 1:2. As a control, the protein
was replaced with water to measure the uorescence of
the nanoparticles.
3. Results and discussion
As a rst step of our study the basic characteristics of
magnetic uids MF1MF4 were established. The average
core diameter DTEM = 10 nm was determined by TEM.
SEM image (Fig. 1, left, MF3 was chosen as representative image) indicates that particles in MFs have nearly
spherical shape and the surface is primarily smooth. The
hydrodynamic diameters DH of studied MFs were observed by DLS technique and data are summarized in
Table. The adsorbed layer thickness was estimated from
the dierence in size between naked and covered (with
BSA (MF2) and dextran (MF3)) magnetic uid. The
BSA and dextran coating thickness were found to be
about 13 nm and 10 nm, respectively. The obtained MF
hydrodynamic diameters suggest that all studied magnetic uids t the requirements for intravenous application (hydrodynamic diameter less than 150 nm).
Fig. 1. SEM image of nanoparticles constituting magnetic uid MF3 (left) and TEM image of insulin amyloid
brils (right).
TABLE
Hydrodynamic diameter DH, saturation magnetization
Ms and concentration of magnetic particles cFe3O4
.
Sample DH [nm] Ms cFe3O4
DLS [mT] [mg/ml]
MF1 26 1.3 36
MF2 63 6.3 85
MF3 65 7.2 90
MF4 80 13.7 175
The magnetic properties of prepared MFs were characterized by SQUID magnetometer. The all samples exhibited a typical superparamagnetic behaviour without a
hysteresis at room temperature (data not shown). The
saturation magnetizations (Ms) of samples and magnetic
particle concentrations (cFe3O4
) calculated from magnetic
measurements are given in Table.
The human insulin was chosen as amyloidogenic protein, whose aggregation caused serious problems in the
treatment of diabetes by insulin injection or by insulin
pumps. Typical amyloid character of insulin aggregates
was observed by ThT uorescence assay as increase of
uorescence intensity (data not shown) and conrmed
by TEM (Fig. 1, right).
We have studied formation of insulin amyloid aggregates Iagg in the presence of magnetic uid at two w/w
ratio of insulin (Ins) and magnetite component of MF
(Ins:MF = 1:1 and 1:2) by ThT assay where lowering of
uorescence values indicates decrease of insulin amyloid
aggregation, i.e. inhibiting activity of MF. The uorescence intensities observed for MF alone or in the presence
of ThT were negligible. Interaction of MF with insulin
amyloid aggregation led to decrease of insulin brillization; however the extent of inhibiting activity was different as it is shown in Fig. 2 (the observed uorescence
intensities were normalized to the uorescence signal detected for the insulin amyloid aggregates alone (Iagg)).
For the ratio Ins:MF = 1:1 the MF1 and MF2 inhibit
polymerization not very intensively, about 45% and 20%
inhibiting activities were observed. The inhibition of
about 70% was detected for both the MF3 and the MF4.
Fig. 2. Inhibition of insulin amyloid brillization by
magnetic uids MF1MF4 observed by ThT assay. The
uorescence intensity signal was normalized to the signal detected for insulin amyloid aggregates formed without MFs (Iagg).
For the ratio Ins:MF = 1:2 the trend of the MFs to affect insulin aggregation is similar to that observed for
previous ratio. However, the eciencies of inhibition
are higher. The magnetic uid MF2 prevents formation
of aggregates less eectively (40% inhibition). In presence of MF1 there is about 65% decrease of the amount
of insulin aggregates in comparison to untreated insulin
brillization. The most eective inhibiting activities of
about 80% and 75% were observed for magnetic uids
MF3 and MF4.
It can be concluded that interaction of MF with insulin amyloid aggregates led to decrease of insulin brillization, the best inhibiting activities were detected for
Presence of Magnetic Fluids Leads to the Inhibition . . . 1307
MF3 and MF4, respectively. We suggest that eciency
of inhibitors depends on the physical parameters of studied MFs together with properties of the coating layer.
This assumption is supported by the results observed for
inhibiting abilities of MF2 and MF3. The physical parameters of MF2 and MF3 are nearly identical, however,
the MF3 inhibits more eectively. We suggest that it is
due to dierent properties of the coating layer. Interaction of the polysaccharide shell (in MF3) with insulin
aggregates leads to higher inhibiting activity compared
to protein modication in MF2.
4. Conclusion
The presence of magnetic uids (MF1MF4) caused
inhibition of insulin amyloid aggregation. Results indicate that magnetite component of magnetic uids is important for inhibiting activity; however, the MF physical
properties together with character of NP coating determine the extent of inhibition. The most signicant inhibiting activity was observed for two MFs characteristic
magnetic nanoparticles stabilized by sodium oleate and
dispersed in physiological saline solution (MF4) or in water and functionalized with dextran (MF3). We assume
that present ndings make eective magnetic uids of
potential interest for solution of the problems associated
with insulin amyloid aggregation.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported within the projects Nos.
26220220005, 2622012033 in the frame of Structural
Funds of European Union, Centre of Excellence of SAS
Nanouid, VEGA 2/0079/10, 2/0077/09, 2/0155/11,
2/0041/12, and 2/0051/09, Slovak Research and Development Agency  contract No. APVV-0171-10, APVV-
-0742-10, and SK-RO-0012-10 and project SAS-NSC Taiwan  Computational approaches to study structure,
folding and interactions of biopolymers.
References
[1] J.D. Sipe, Amyloid Proteins, WileyVCH, Weinheim
2005.
[2] D.M. Walsh, D.J. Selkoe, Protein Pept. Lett. 11, 213
(2004).
[3] S.S.-S. Wang, K.-N. Liu, T.-C. Han, Biochim. Biophys. Acta Mol. Basis Dis. 1802, 519 (2010).
[4] M. Kanapathipillai, S.H. Ku, K. Girigoswami,
Ch.B. Park, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Com. 365, 808
(2008).
[5] A. Bellova, E. Bystrenova, M. Koneracka, P. Kopcansky, F. Valle, M. Timko, J. Bagelova, F. Biscarini,
Z. Gazova, Nanotechnology 21, 065103 (2010).