(19) United States
(12) Patent Application Publication (10) Pub. No.: US 2016/0349738 A1
Sisk
US 2016.0349738A1
(43) Pub. Date: Dec. 1, 2016
(54)
(71)
(72)
(73)
(21)
(22)
(86)
(60)
CUSTOMIZED, WEARABLE 3D PRINTED
ARTICLES AND METHODS OF
MANUFACTURING SAME
Applicant: PRINTERTAILORED, LLC,
Germantown, WI (US)
Inventor: Tyler J. Sisk, Cross Plains, WI (US)
Assignee: Printer Tailored, LLC., Germantown,
WI (US)
Appl. No.: 15/116,871
PCT Fed: Feb. 6, 2015
PCT No.: PCT/US2O15/O14817
S 371 (c)(1),
(2) Date: Aug. 5, 2016
Related U.S. Application Data
Provisional application No. 62/064,337, filed on Oct.
15, 2014, provisional application No. 61/937.217.
filed on Feb. 7, 2014.
Subject (human, pet,
inanimate object, etc.)
y
Record image data (e.g., subject's body or portion(s) thcreo?)
Create subject virtual
image
Create andforsclect and
customize articlef object
using creation tool and
virtual image
Articlefobject
information transferred
to printer (e.g., local or external printer) and
printed
Publication Classification
(51) Int. Cl.
G05B 9/24097
B33Y 70/00
B33 W IMO
B29C 67/00
B33/50/02
B33 W 80/00
U.S. C.
CPC ........... G05B 19/4097 (2013.01); B33Y50/02
(2014.12); B33Y 80/00 (2014.12); B33Y 10/00
(2014.12); B29C 67/0088 (2013.01); B33Y
70/00 (2014.12); B29L 2031/48 (2013.01)
(57) ABSTRACT
The present invention relates to three dimensional (3D) printed garments and any wearable article, as well as to
processes and methods of manufacturing the same. Image information obtained from a subject, for example, images and information related to a subjects body or body part(s) is used to generate a garment or wearable object with a
customized fit. In particular, the present invention provides the collection of a subject’s data (e.g., using image acqui
sition devices, methods and Software), and use of the data to
create a model (e.g., virtual model) that in turn is used to
create a subject specific article of clothing or other wearable
object.
(2006.01)
(2006.01)
(2006.01)
(2006.01)
(2006.01)
(2006.01)
(52)
Stored in memory (local s and/or remote)
Stored in memory (local
and or remote) 
Patent Application Publication Dec. 1, 2016 Sheet 1 of 3 US 2016/0349738A1
F.G. 1
Subject (human, pet,
inanimate object, etc.)
Record image data (e.g., Subject's body or
portion(s) thereof)
Create subject virtual Stored in memory (local
image and/or remote)
Create and/or Select and
customize article/object Stored in memory (local
using creation tool and and/or remote)
virtual image
Article/object
information transferred
to printer (e.g., local or
external printer) and
printed
 
Patent Application Publication Dec. 1, 2016 Sheet 2 of 3 US 2016/0349738A1
90?
??ºzz
${}?
??tiz

 
Patent Application Publication Dec. 1, 2016 Sheet 3 of 3 US 2016/0349738A1
 
US 2016/0349738 A1
CUSTOMIZED, WEARABLE 3D PRINTED
ARTICLES AND METHODS OF
MANUFACTURING SAME
FIELD OF THE INVENTION
0001. The present invention relates to three dimensional
(3D) printed garments and any wearable article, as well as
to processes and methods of manufacturing the same. Image information obtained from a subject, for example, images
and information related to a subject’s body or body part(s) is used to generate a garment or wearable object with a
customized fit. In particular, the present invention provides the collection of a subject’s data (e.g., using image acqui
sition devices, methods and Software), and use of the data to
create a model (e.g., virtual model) that in turn is used to
create a subject specific article of clothing or other wearable
object.
BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION
0002 Wearing a garment that does not fit properly may
not only be embarrassing it often causes skin irritation, rash
and chafling, or even poor performance (e.g., for individuals
engaged in an activity (e.g., sports, military operation, etc.).
For example, those that participate in contact sports often
wear pads or other types of protective gear (e.g., shin guards,
mouth guards, helmets, etc.) that protect the wearer from
physical contact with others or the environment. To date, obtaining protective gear specifically customized to fit a
single individual has not been available.
0003. Similarly, there are many types of garments and
wearable clothing that require a nearly perfect fit, for
example, a mask or respiratory worn in a setting to prevent
spread of infectious disease, a piece of lingerie or body
armor (e.g., a bullet proof vest). While these articles come
in many different sizes, it is often the case that there is not
a size available that properly fits a specific individual (e.g.,
the individual’s body or portion thereof is too big or too
small to fit properly into the closest available size). For
example, today’s intimates/lingerie market is predominately
geared towards proportionately sized women. That is, most
lingerie is made in sizes Small, medium, and large. For
women who are proportionately sized according the lingerie
manufacturer's standards, finding well-fitting lingerie may
not be a problem. However, there are great number of women who do not fit within the confines of the manufac
turer's sizing standards.
0004 To date, custom fit wearable objects/garments have
either not been available or the cost associated with obtain
ing the same has been cost prohibitive.
SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION
0005. The present invention relates to three dimensional
(3D) printed garments and any wearable article as well as to
methods of manufacturing same. Image information derived
from a Subject's data, for example images and information
related to a subjects body or body part(s) is used in the
generation of a garment or wearable object with a custom
ized fit. In particular, the present invention provides the
collection of a Subject's data (e.g., using image acquisition
devices, methods and Software), and use of the data to create
a model (e.g., virtual model) that in turn is used to create a
subject specific article of clothing or other wearable object.
Dec. 1, 2016
0006. Accordingly, in some embodiments, the invention
provides systems and/or methods of manufacturing a cus
tomized wearable article. In one embodiment, the system and/or method comprises providing a Subject; obtaining image data regarding the Subject’s body or portion(s)
thereof, creating a virtual image of the Subject using the
image data; selecting a virtual article from an article set, or
creating a virtual article, using a creation tool; customizing
the article utilizing the creation tool and the virtual image:
and printing the article using a three dimensional (3D)
printer. The invention is not limited by the type of subject.
Indeed, systems, methods and articles of manufacture
described herein may be utilized and/or worn by any subject including, but not limited to, humans, animals, inanimate
objects and other subjects described herein. In like manner,
the invention is not limited by the type of article. Articles of
the invention include, but are not limited to, garments and
other types of wearable articles/objects (e.g., that are worn
on a Subject's body) Such as shirts, pants, Vests, dresses,
underwear, Vests, suits, jackets, skirts, shoes, hats, glasses and/or glass frames, belts, athletic equipment (e.g., pads,
guards, helmets, masks, and the like), masks or respirators (or portions thereof), diapers, mouth guards, armor, or other
type of wearable objects described herein. Articles may be
made of only one type of material, or, multiple (e.g. 2-10,
10-20, 20-30, 30-40, 40-50, 50-60, 60-70, 70-80, 80-90,
90-100, or more) types of material (e.g., in one or more
layers, multiple types of materials printed in an intertwined
manner, etc.). The customized, wearable articles may be a
perfect fit or they may be generated in a size that enhances
or reduces the physical appearance of a Subject's body or
body part(s). The obtaining image data regarding the Sub
ject’s body or portion(s) thereof can be obtained by a variety
of methods including, but not limited to, use of a 3D scanner
or other type of recording device described herein. For
example, non-limiting examples of recording devices
include a camera (e.g., digital camera), video recorder (e.g., digital video recorder), structural capture camera, or design
tool known in the art to capture information (e.g., shape,
scale, dimensions, color, etc.) related to a subject (e.g., a
Subject's body or portion(s) thereof). In addition, a design
tool (e.g., including, but not limited to, 123DCatch (AU
TODESK, Inc.); Relievos; Youspin, Dermendar, etc.) can be
used to capture data/information (e.g., shape, Scale, dimen
sions, color, etc.). The invention is also not limited by the
type of virtual image of the subject created. Indeed, multiple
types of virtual images find use in the invention including,
but not limited to, three dimensional (3D) surface images, spin images (e.g., 360 degree horizontal image, 360 degree
vertical image, or a combination thereof (e.g., with Subject being the target in the middle of the image)), or other type
of virtual image described herein. In one embodiment, the
virtual image is utilized to generate custom sizing informa
tion (e.g., specific dimensions and measurements of the part
or parts of the object are determined using the virtual
image). In another embodiment, the custom sizing informa
tion is utilized to generate customized articles/objects described herein. For example, image data (e.g., shape, size,
scale and/or dimension) from the virtual image can be used
(e.g., by a design tool) to customize (e.g., the size, shape,
thickness, etc.) an article from an article/object set or to
create a new article/object.
0007. In another embodiment, the present invention pro vides systems and methods that permit a user to create a 
US 2016/0349738 A1
customized object/article locally (e.g., using means
described herein for capturing Subject data/information,
transfer and/or downloading of the Subject data/information
(e.g., regarding a subject's body or portion(s) thereof) to a
local pc, means described herein for converting the Subject data/information into a virtual image (e.g., using computer
aided design software (e.g., AUTOCAD, RAPIDWORKS,
SOLIDWORKS or similar software described herein)) to
create a virtual image on the local pc), means of using the
virtual image to create a customized, virtual article/object on
the local pc (e.g., using a Software/creation tool on the local
pc (e.g., that permits creating an article/object and/or for
selecting an article/object from a list and customizing the
article/object based upon the virtual image), sending the
virtual article/object to a local printer (e.g., connected
directly to the local pc), printing the article/object and
Subsequently enjoying the ability to use (e.g., wear) the
article/object (e.g., as shown in FIG. 1). In one embodiment, capturing Subject data/information is performed using a 3D
scanner that generates a virtual image (e.g., a 3D virtual
image (e.g., AUTOCAD, SOLIDWORKS or other type of
electronic 3D image)) of the Subject data/information (e.g., regarding a Subject's body or portion(s) thereof (e.g., the 3D
scanner captures Subject data/information and generates a
virtual image (e.g., a 3D virtual image (e.g., AUTOCAD,
SOLIDWORKS or other type of electronic 3D image)))).
0008. In some embodiments, the invention provides sys
tems and methods that permit a user for to create a custom
ized object/article (e.g., using means described herein for
capturing Subject data/information, transfer and/or down
loading of the Subject data/information (e.g., regarding a
subjects body or portion(s) thereof) to a remote data server,
means described herein for converting the Subject data/
information into a virtual image (e.g., use of AUTOCAD,
RAPIDWORKS, SOLIDWORKS or similar software
described herein to create a virtual image on the remote data
server) or means of transferring a captured 3D virtual image
(e.g., using a 3D scanner) to a remote data server, means of
using the virtual image to create a customized, virtual
article/object (e.g., using a software/creation tool (e.g., that
permits creating an article/object and/or for selecting an
article/object from a list and customizing the article/object
based upon the virtual image), sending the virtual article/
object to a printer (e.g., local and/or remote printer (e.g.,
connected via the internet), printing of the article/object (e.g., locally or remotely), and if printed remotely, shipping
of the article/object (e.g., to a Subject and/or specific loca
tion).
0009. In some embodiments, the system includes a soft
ware/creation tool located on a server and/or computer (e.g., retailer/developer server and/or computer used by retailers
and/or individual developers of article/objects to create a
computer-readable Script (e.g., encoding the virtual article/
object), described herein, for the customizable article/object.
In some embodiments, the Software/creation tool comprises
a program that runs on the developers/retailers computer,
a local pc (e.g., as described above), or on a server (e.g., a
data server) connected (e.g., via a network (e.g., the inter
net)) to developer's/retailers computer. In some embodi
ments, the system comprises a data server that contains
Subject virtual image storage, virtual article/object storage,
Script storage, developer/retailer interface and/or a web
server interface. In some embodiments, the software/cre
ation tool interfaces with the data server via an interface (e.g.
Dec. 1, 2016
a retailer and/or developer interface), whereas a subject desiring object/article (e.g., an end user of the system) can
use subjects computer to interface with the data server via
the internet and web server interface.
0010. In some embodiments, the system includes a print/ order management server that receives and/or processes computer-readable Script (e.g., printforder management
server receives and processes Script encoding the virtual
article/object (e.g., created by user and/or customized by
user using article/object from a list) and sends instructions to
printer(s) via a printer interface to print article/object). In
Some embodiments, the print/order management server
stores script encoding the virtual article/object in Script
storage. In one embodiment, a subject desiring object/article
(e.g., an end user of the system) interfaces with System via
the internet and web server interface. In one embodiments,
a print/order management server interfaces with a retailer
via retailer interface. The invention is not limited by the type
or kind of retailer. Indeed, a retailer may be an existing retail
company (e.g., AMAZON, TARGET, MACY'S, COSTCO,
etc.), printing company (e.g. STRATASYS, Inc., MARK
FORG3D, HEWLETT-PACKARD, Inc., MAKERBOT,
Inc., 3D-SYSTEMS, Corp., The EXONE Company, VOX
ELJET AG, GROUP GORGE, Inc., CAMTEK LTD.,
ORGANOVO Holdings, Inc.), computer company (e.g.,
APPLE, MICROSOFT, IBM, DELL, etc.), or other com
pany (e.g., that provides or desires to provide components
of or all of the systems, methods and customized wearable
articles of the invention). In one embodiment, the retailer is
a combination of two or more retailers (e.g., a combination
of AMAZON, STRATASYS, and MICROSOFT) that col
lectively provide the systems, methods and customized
wearable articles of the invention).
0011. In one embodiment, the invention provides a
method of generating image data regarding the Subjects
body or portion(s) thereof, image data generated using the
method, and methods of using the image data in a process for
manufacturing customized wearable garments and/or
objects. The invention is not limited by a particular method
of generating the image data. In one embodiment, the image
data is captured using a 3D scanner. The invention is not
limited by the type of 3D scanner used. In one preferred
embodiment, any 3D scanner that is useful for creating a
point cloud of geometric samples on the Surface of a
subject’s body or portion(s) thereof may be used, with the
resulting points used to extrapolate the shape of the Subjects
body or portion(s) thereof (e.g., the points are used to
electronically reconstruct the subject’s body or portion(s)
thereof). In one embodiment, the 3D scanner is a contact 3D
scanner. In another embodiment, the 3D scanner is a non
contact 3D scanner. In one embodiment, a non-contact 3D
scanner is an active scanner. In another embodiment, the
non-contact 3D scanner is a passive Scanner. In one embodi
ment, multiple scans of a subject’s body or portion(s) thereof
are performed (e.g., and brought into a common reference
system (e.g., aligned or registered) and Subsequently merged
(e.g., to create a virtual model (e.g., in a 3D scanning pipeline process). Exemplary contact and non-contact 3D
scanners are described herein. However, the invention is not
limited to any particular 3D scanner. Indeed, any 3D scanner
finds use in the invention. For example, in one embodiment, 3D gesture recognition and Scanning technology (e.g., cre
ated by PRIMESENSE) is utilized. In another embodiment, the image data is captured using a traditional camera (e.g., 
US 2016/0349738 A1
digital camera, video recorder, structural capture camera,
etc. (with a cone-like field of view that collects information
about the surface of a subject’s body or portion(s) thereof)).
In a further embodiment, when a traditional camera is used,
information about the surface of a subjects body or portion
(s) thereof is converted into a virtual 3D image.
0012. In one embodiment, the invention provides a
method of obtaining a 3D virtual image of the surface of a
Subject’s body or portion(s) thereof using a 3D scanner and
Subsequently using the 3D virtual image in a process for
manufacturing customized wearable garments and/or
objects. In another embodiment, the invention provides a
method of obtaining information about the surface of a
Subject’s body or portion(s) thereof using a camera (e.g.,
digital camera, video recorder, structural capture camera,
etc. (with a cone-like field of view that collects information
about the surface of a subject’s body or portion(s) thereof)),
converting the collected information into a 3D virtual image of the surface of a subject’s body or portion(s) thereof, and
using the 3D virtual image in a process for manufacturing
customized wearable garments and/or objects. In another
embodiment, the 3D virtual image is utilized to generate sizing information (e.g., specific dimensions and/or mea
surements of the subject’s body or portion(s) thereof are
determined using the virtual image). In one embodiment, the
sizing information is utilized in order to manufacture a
garment, or other wearable object described herein, that fits
a subjects body or portion(s) thereof in a desired way (e.g.,
that is customized, using the sizing information, to fit the
dimensions of a subject’s body or portion(s) thereof).
0013. In one embodiment, the invention provides a
method of manufacturing a garment, or other wearable
object described herein, comprising using sizing information
(e.g., specific dimensions and/or measurements of a Sub
jects body or portion(s) thereof) determined using a virtual
image of the Subject’s body or portion(s) thereof, identifying
(e.g., from an established list of items or generating de novo
using a create tool) a virtual garment or other wearable
object to be manufactured, running a process (e.g., in a
Software and/or firmware component of a computer) that
configures the dimensions of the virtual garment or other
wearable object to conform to the sizing information (e.g., that is customized to the sizing information), electronically
sending (e.g., via local network or via the internet) the
configured virtual garment or other wearable object to a 3D
printer, and printing the garment. In one embodiment, the 3D
printed garment is worn as printed. In another embodiment,
the 3D garment/object is further processed (e.g., material is
added to or removed from the printed garment/object) prior
to wearing. For example, in one embodiment, after printing,
a garment/object may be altered by a process such as
trimming, sewing, affixing, tagging, painting, Sticking or
other process described herein. For example, in an embodi
ment wherein only a portion of a wearable article/garment is
printed using the compositions and methods of the inven
tion, additional material may be added to the printed article/
garment post printing (e.g., glass lenses may be added to
glass frames generated according to the invention, a filter
may be added to a respirator generated according to the
invention, a logo may be added to a shirt or vest generated according to the invention, a closing means (e.g., hook and
eye, VELCRO, Zipper, tie, etc.) may be added post gener
ating a bra of the invention, etc.).
Dec. 1, 2016
0014. The invention is not limited by the type of 3D
printer used to print a garment or other type of object
described herein. Indeed, a variety of 3D printers find use in
the invention including, but not limited to, a printer manu
factured, designed, and/or sold by STRATASYS, Inc.,
MARK FORG3D, HEWLETT-PACKARD, Inc., MAKER
BOT, Inc., 3D-SYSTEMS, Corp., The EXONE Company,
VOXELJET AG, GROUP GORGE, Inc., CAMTEK LTD.,
ORGANOVO Holdings, Inc., or any other printer known in
the art or described herein. In one embodiment, the 3D
printer utilized is one that mixes materials while printing (e.g., prints an object/garment with two or more materials
(e.g., plastic, rubber, carbon fiber, metal, etc.)). In a further
embodiment, the 3D printer prints an object/garment with
two or more materials intertwined (e.g., in order to change the look, feel, rigidity, and/or elasticity of the object/gar
ment).
DESCRIPTION OF THE FIGURES
0015 FIG. 1 shows a process flow diagram of an exem
plary method of how a user may interact with the systems
and methods of the invention in order to generate a custom
ized article/object of the invention.
0016 FIG. 2 shows a schematic outline of a networked
system for use with customized manufacturing processes of
the invention.
0017 FIG. 3 shows a process flow diagram illustrating an
example of how a user may interact with the systems and
methods of the invention in order to generate a customized
article/object of the invention.
DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE
INVENTION
0018. The present invention relates to three dimensional
(3D) printed garments and any wearable object as well as to
methods of generating and manufacturing same. Image
information derived from a Subject's data, for example, images of a Subject’s body or body parts, is used in the
generation of a garment or other wearable article with a
customized fit. In particular, the present invention provides the collection of a subject’s data (e.g., using image acqui
sition devices, methods and Software) and use of same to
create a model (e.g., virtual model) that in turn is used to
create a subject specific article of clothing or other wearable
material.
0019. The invention utilizes 3D printer technology to
create unique, custom fit garments and other types of wear
able articles/objects. In particular, the invention provides
heretofore unavailable methods of manufacturing custom
ized, wearable garments or other type of articles/objects
described herein, as well as the customized, printed gar
ments and/or wearable articles/objects. The terms “wearable
object,” “wearable article,” “garments’ and the like as used
herein refer to items that are worn on a subject’s body, thought of both in a traditional sense as articles of clothing
(e.g., shirts, pants, Vests, dresses, underwear, Vests, suits, jackets, skirts, etc.), as well as articles/objects that may not
be traditionally thought of as articles of clothing but that
may nevertheless be worn on a Subject’s body Such as shoes,
hats, athletic equipment (e.g., pads, guards, helmets, masks,
and the like), respirator masks, diapers, mouth guards,
armor, or other type of wearable objects described herein.
Indeed, the terms article, object and garment are meant to 
US 2016/0349738 A1
include any article of manufacture that a Subject (e.g.,
human, animal (e.g., dog, horse, cat, etc.) may wear or be
made to wear. Utilizing the methods of the present inven
tion, a customized, wearable object may be generated and
worn by a subject once and discarded, or, may be worn
multiple (e.g. 2-10, 10-20, 20-30, 30-40, 40-50, 50-60,
60-70, 70-80, 80-90, 90-100, or more) times before the
Subject no longer finds use for the wearable object (e.g., the
object is thrown out, recycled, or provided to another subject
to wear). Wearable articles generated and worn, once or
multiple times, according to the invention are described in
detail herein.
0020. In some embodiments, each step of the manufac
turing process is performed at one location (e.g., within a
retail store (e.g., located in a mall or shopping center), in a
Subject’s home, etc.). In other embodiments, one or more
steps of the process are performed in one location while
other steps are performed at a second, third, fourth, or more
locations. For example, in some embodiments, the step of
obtaining image data is performed at a first location (e.g.,
within a Subject's home (e.g., using a 3D scanner or camera
and Software for acquiring images of the Subject’s body and/or body part(s)), the step of utilizing the image data to
create a virtual image of the subject is performed at the first
or a second location, utilizing the virtual image to generate
custom sizing information for garment or wearable article is
performed at the first, second or third location, the step of
sending sizing information to printer and instructing the
printer to print the garment or wearable article is performed
at the first, second, third or fourth location, and the printing
of the wearable article takes place at the first, second, third,
fourth or fifth location.
0021. Thus, in some embodiments, the invention pro vides methods of manufacturing a customized, wearable
object. In other embodiments, the invention provides cus
tomized, wearable objects (e.g., generated according to
methods described herein). As shown in FIG. 3, in some
embodiments, a method of manufacturing a customized, wearable object comprises providing a Subject (e.g., human,
animal or other living Subject) and obtaining image data
regarding the subject’s body or portion(s) thereof. In further
embodiments, once image data regarding the Subject's body
or portion(s) thereof is obtained (e.g., using a recording
device described herein), the image data is utilized to create
a virtual image of the Subject. In other embodiments, image data regarding the Subject's body or portion(s) thereof is
captured using a 3D scanner which also generates a virtual
image of the subject’s body or portion(s) thereof. The
invention is not limited by the type of virtual image created.
Indeed, multiple types of virtual images find use in the
invention including, but not limited to, three dimensional
(3D) surface images, spin images (e.g., 360 degree horizon
tal image, 360 degree vertical image, or a combination
thereof (e.g., with subject being the target in the middle of
the image)), or other type of virtual image described herein.
Upon creation of a virtual image, in some embodiments, the
virtual image is utilized to identify a part or parts of the
Subject upon which a garment or wearable article described
herein is to be worn. In another embodiment, a 3D scanner
is used to scan only that portion of a Subject’s body or
portion(s) thereof upon which an article or garment is to be
worn. Alternatively, in some embodiments, a 3D scanner is
used to Scan a larger portion of a Subject's body or portion(s)
thereof upon which an article or garment is to be worn, and
Dec. 1, 2016
the resulting image data of the 3D scan is modified (e.g.,
trimmed, aligned, cut) to result in a virtual image of only that
portion of the subject’s body upon which an article or
garment is to be worn. Once the part or parts of the Subject
upon which a garment or wearable article is to be worn is
identified, in Some embodiments, the virtual image is uti
lized to generate custom sizing information (e.g., specific
dimensions and measurements of the part or parts of the
Subject are determined using the virtual image). The custom
sizing information is then utilized, in Some embodiments, to
generate customized, wearable articles described herein
(e.g., using custom sizing information generated from the
virtual image, a wearable article/object is created in a first,
virtual sense (e.g., using a computer and/or software a
wearable article/object is virtually created and then sent to a
printer (e.g., a 3D printer described herein) upon which the
customized, wearable article/object is printed). In some
embodiments, the systems and methods of the invention
utilize a creation tool (e.g., Software that is located locally on
a user's computer, or, Software that is located remotely on a
provider's/developer's computer) that allows a user to select
a generic article/item from a list of articles/items in order to
create a computer simulated/virtual wearable object/article
(e.g., that is customized (e.g., size, shape, materials, layering
of materials, etc.) using the creation tool). In some embodi
ments, the virtual wearable article/object is viewed on the
virtual image prior to printing. The custom sizing informa
tion and/or the virtual wearable object/article may be stored
(e.g., locally or remotely (e.g., in a memory component of a
computer) for later use. A printer (e.g., 3D printer described
herein) utilized to print a customized, wearable article may be a local printer (e.g., within the same site (e.g., building)
as a computer upon which virtual image, custom sizing
information and/or virtual wearable article/object is located)
or it may be at a remote location (e.g., a different site (e.g.,
different building, different city, different state, or a different
country) where the printer receives the custom sizing infor
mation and/or virtual wearable article/object information for
printing. The invention is not limited by the type of printer
utilized to print a wearable object of the invention. Indeed,
any printer capable of printing wearable objects/articles of
the invention and known in the art may be utilized. In some
embodiments, if the printer is a local printer, the subject will
have the wearable object/article for immediate use. In other
embodiments, if the printer is a remote printer, the wearable
object/article is mailed to the subject or picked up. Thus, the
invention provides systems and methods for creating a
subject specific wearable article of clothing or other wear
able object described herein.
0022. The invention is not limited to any particular Subject. Indeed, the systems, methods and articles of manu
facture described herein may be utilized by any subject regardless of age, size, and gender. Moreover, while human
Subjects are preferred users of systems, methods and articles
of manufacture of the invention, in other preferred embodi
ments, an animal (e.g., domesticated animal (e.g., a pet))
may also utilize and/or benefit from systems, methods and
articles of manufacture of the invention (e.g., as described
herein, information related to an animal’s body or portion thereof may be captured, converted into a virtual, digital file
and/or model, a customized, wearable article created and/or
identified, printed and Subsequently worn by the animal). In
Some embodiments, the Subject is an inanimate object (e.g.,
vehicle (e.g., car, truck, ATV, etc.), boat, Snowmobile, ski or 
US 2016/0349738 A1
pair of skis, trailer, gun, tool, power tool, helmet, etc.) for
which an article or object is made using the systems and
methods described herein, to hold or cover (e.g., partially or
completely).
0023. Accordingly, in some embodiments, the invention
provides systems and methods for manufacturing a custom
ized wearable object comprising providing an inanimate
object (e.g., a car) and obtaining image data regarding the
object or portion(s) thereof. Once image data regarding the
object or portion(s) thereof is obtained (e.g., using a record
ing device described herein), the image data is utilized to
create a virtual image of the object or portion thereof. Upon
creation of a virtual image, in Some embodiments, the virtual
image is utilized to identify a part or parts of the object upon
which an object or article described herein will be placed
(e.g., on the grill, over the entire car, etc.). Once the part or
parts of the object upon which an object or article is to be
placed is identified, in some embodiments, the virtual image is utilized to generate custom sizing information (e.g.,
specific dimensions and measurements of the part or parts of
the object are determined using the virtual image). The
custom sizing information is then utilized, in Some embodi
ments, to generate customized articles/objects described
herein (e.g., using custom sizing information generated from
the virtual image, a wearable article/object is created in a
first, virtual sense (e.g., using a computer and/or Software an
article/object is virtually created and then sent to a printer
(e.g., a 3D printer described herein) upon which the cus
tomized article/object is printed). In some embodiments, the
virtual article/object is viewed on the virtual image prior to
printing. The custom sizing information and/or the virtual
object/article may be stored (e.g., locally or remotely (e.g.,
in a memory component of a computer) for later use. A
printer (e.g., 3D printer described herein) utilized to print a
customized article/object may be a local printer (e.g., within
the same site (e.g., building) as a computer upon which
virtual image, custom sizing information and/or virtual
article/object is located) or it may be at a remote location
(e.g., a different site (e.g., different building, different city, different state, or a different country) where the printer
receives the custom sizing information and/or virtual article/
object information for printing).
0024. Once a subject (e.g., human, animal, or other type
of subject described herein) is identified, systems and meth
ods of the invention are utilized to acquire image data/
information regarding the Subject (e.g., the Subject's body or
portion(s) thereof). The invention is not limited by the type
of device utilized to acquire image data/information. In
Some embodiments, the invention utilizes any device that is
capable of acquiring the appearance and/or shape of the
Subject. Thus, in Some embodiments, once a subject is
provided, a device is utilized to capture surface features
(e.g., shape, size, dimensions, appearance, etc.) of the Sub
ject (e.g., a disrobed Subject). In one embodiment, a 3D
scanner is utilized to capture Surface features (e.g., shape, size, dimensions, appearance, etc.) of the Subject. In another
embodiment, a camera (e.g., digital camera), video recorder
(e.g., digital video recorder) or design tool known in the art
is used to capture information (e.g., shape, Scale, dimen
sions, color, etc.) related to a Subject (e.g., a Subject's body
or portion(s) thereof (e.g., shin, thigh, leg, foot, ankle, arm,
wrist, chest, neck, head, face, ear, waist, torso, etc.). In some
embodiments, the invention utilizes a structural capture
camera (e.g., from LYNX Laboratories, Texas) to capture
Dec. 1, 2016
information (e.g., shape, Scale, dimensions, color, etc.)
related to a subject’s body or portion thereof. In other
embodiments, a digital camera (e.g., digital SLR, Smart
phone camera, compact digital camera, professional digital
camera, etc.) in combination with a design tool (e.g., includ
ing, but not limited to, 123DCatch (AUTODESK, Inc.);
Relievos; YouSpin, Dermendar, etc.) is used to capture data/information (e.g., shape, Scale, dimensions, color, etc.).
The captured data/information is stored on a memory com
ponent. As used herein, the terms “memory, memory com
ponent,” “memory device' and the like are used to refer to
computer memory types including, but not limited to, ran
dom access memory (RAM) (e.g., DRAM (e.g., DDR,
SDRAM), SRAM, T-RAM, Z-RAM, TTRAM) and read
only memory (ROM) (e.g., mask ROM, PROM, EPROM,
EEROM, NVRAM, flash memory) as well as to the types of
mechanical devices utilized to host/hold same (e.g., mag netic tape, hard drive, optical drive, CD, DVD, and other
storage media known in the art).
0025. In some embodiments, captured information (e.g., shape, Scale, dimensions, color, etc. of a Subject of portion(s)
thereof) is utilized to generate a fly around scene (e.g., 360°
view) of the Subject (e.g., including size, scale, dimensions
and other features of a subject (e.g., Subject’s body or
portion(s) thereof upon which a wearable object may be
worn). For example, in some embodiments, 360° hemi
spherical and/or spherical view of the subject or portion(s)
thereof are generated (e.g., using HTML5/FLASH (e.g., on
a background (e.g., a White or transparent background)).
0026. A subject’s image data/information (e.g., acquired
as described herein) is utilized to generate a virtual image of
the Subject. For example, in some embodiments, a subjects image data/information (e.g., Subjects captured information
(e.g., shape, Scale, dimensions, color, etc.) related to a
subject’s body or portion(s) thereof) is converted into, or
used to generate, a digital/virtual model (e.g., using com
puter-aided design (CAD) or other type of virtual drawing
(e.g., of the subject’s body or a portion(s) thereof)). The
invention is not limited by the type of software utilized.
Indeed, any software useful for generation and/or manipu lation of virtual images may be used including, but not
limited to, software created and/or sold by AUTODESK,
DASSAULT SYSTMES S.A., EXA Corp., PTC, Inc.,
CIMATRON, Ltd., NEXTENGINE, Inc., ANSYS, Inc.,
FARO Technologies, Inc., or other provider known in the
art. Thus, in some embodiments, the invention utilizes CAD
Software to generate a virtual image of a Subject or portion(s)
thereof. CAD software for virtual model generation may use
vector-based graphics (e.g., to generate and depict a virtual
model the Subject) and/or may use/produce raster graphics (e.g., that depict overall appearance of virtual Subject). In
some preferred embodiments, the invention utilizes AUTO
CAD (e.g., for desktop applications, mobile applications,
web-based applications, cloud-based applications, etc.) for
generation and use of 2D and 3D virtual models. A virtual
image/model (e.g., a virtual geometric model of a Subject or
portion(s) thereof generated utilizing CAD and/or computer aided geometric design) provides access to specific sizing
information of the subject or portion(s) thereof . For
example, in some embodiments, CAD is used to design a
virtual image of a subject or portion thereof including, but
not limited to, a Subjects specific anatomical structures in
two-dimensional (2D) space as well as a Surface map of a
subject or portion(s) thereof in three-dimensional (3D) 
US 2016/0349738 A1
space. In some embodiments, CAD is used to produce an
animation and/or simulation of a subject.
0027. In one embodiment, a 3D scanner is utilized to
generate a virtual image of a Subject and/or object described
herein. For example, in some embodiments, a subjects image data/information (e.g., Subject's captured information
(e.g., shape, Scale, dimensions, color, etc.) related to a
subjects body or portion(s) thereof) is captured and/or
generated utilizing a 3D scanner (e.g., that creates a digital/
virtual model of the subject’s body or a portion(s) thereof)).
0028. A 3D scanner may be used to create a point cloud
of geometric samples on the Surface of the Subject. These
points can be used to extrapolate the shape of the Subject (a
process called reconstruction). If color information is col
lected at each point, then the colors on the surface of the
Subject can also be determined.
0029 3D scanners share several traits with cameras. Like
cameras, they have a cone-like field of view, and like
cameras, they can collect information about Surfaces that are
not obscured. While a camera collects color information
about surfaces within its field of view, a 3D scanner collects
distance information about surfaces within its field of view.
The “picture' produced by a 3D scanner describes the
distance to a surface at each point in the picture. This allows
the three dimensional position of each point in the picture to
be identified.
0030. In one embodiment, a single scan is used to gen
erated a virtual model. In another embodiment, a plurality
(e.g., 2-10, 10-20, 20-40, 40-100, more than 100) of scans is
used to generate a virtual model of a Subject and/or object.
In embodiments where multiple scans are used to generate
a virtual model, each scan can be aligned and/or registered
(e.g., into a common reference system) and then merged to
create the virtual model.
0031. The invention is not limited by the type of tech
nology utilized to acquire the shape of a Subject and/or
object. In one embodiment, the technology is a contact
technology (e.g., that probes a Subject and/or object through physical touch (e.g., using a carriage system with rigid arms
held tightly in perpendicular relationship and each axis
gliding along a track, an articulated arm with rigid bones and
high precision angular sensors, and/or a combination
thereof). In one embodiment, the 3D scanner is a contact
coordinate measuring machine. In another, the technology is
a non-contact (e.g., active or inactive) technology. In another
embodiment, the technology is a non-contact technology
Such as an active scanner (e.g., that emits a type of radiation
or light to detect Subject/object reflection or radiation pass ing through object in order to probe an object or environ
ment. The invention is not limited by the type of active
scanner. Indeed, any type of active scanner known in the art
may be utilized including, but not limited to, light (e.g.,
structured light, modulated light), laser, ultrasound, X-ray, time of flight laser (lidar), or other type of active scanning
known in the art. In one embodiment, the scanner is a
computed tomography imaging device. In another embodi
ment, the scanner is a magnetic resonance imaging device.
In one embodiment, the Scanner is a passive, non-contact
scanner Such as a stereoscopic system, photometric system,
or a silhouette system.
0032. The invention is not limited by the type of digital/
virtual model. In some embodiments, the digital model is a
three dimensional (3D) model of a subjects image data/
information (e.g., captured data/information related to the
Dec. 1, 2016
subject’s body or portion thereof). In some embodiments,
the digital model represents a functional capture of infor
mation related to a Subject. For example, as described
herein, the invention provides functional capture of infor
mation related to a Subject and the generation of a 3D (e.g.,
a detailed 3D) model (e.g., including characteristics such as,
but not limited to, size, dimensions, Scale, shape, color, or
any recordable feature). In some embodiments, the digital
model is a digital surface model (DSM) (e.g., of the sub
ject’s body or portion(s) thereof). The invention is not
limited by the type of virtual image created. Indeed, multiple
types of virtual images find use in the invention including,
but not limited to, three dimensional (3D) surface images, spin images (e.g., 360 degree horizontal image, 360 degree
vertical image, or a combination thereof (e.g., with Subject being the target in the middle of the image)), or other type
of virtual image described herein.
0033) A virtual image/model (e.g., CAD or other type of
virtual drawing (e.g., of the Subject's body or a portion(s)
thereof)) can be stored (e.g., temporarily or permanently) on
a memory component. Once obtained, the virtual image/
model can be utilized (e.g., using computer-aided design
(CAD) or other type of virtual drawing software) to generate
specific size and dimension information for a wearable
article/object of the invention (e.g., selected from an article/
object set described below). For example, upon generation
of a virtual image, in Some embodiments, the virtual image is utilized to identify a part or parts of the subject upon
which a garment or wearable article described herein is to be
worn. Once the part or parts of the subject upon which a
garment or wearable article is to be worn is identified, in
Some embodiments, the virtual image is utilized to generate
custom sizing information (e.g., specific dimensions and
measurements of the part or parts of the Subject are deter
mined using the virtual image (e.g., using a creation tool
(e.g., Software)). In further embodiments, software is used
for architectural rendering, object modeling, digital measur
ing (e.g., to generate digital measurement of a Subject's body
dimensions (e.g., all or a portion of a Subject’s body)). In
Some embodiments, a creation tool (e.g., software) is uti
lized to create a virtual, wearable object on a portion of a the
virtual Subject image (e.g., a vest is virtually drawn over the
subject). In further embodiments, a visual representation of
a wearable object is generated using the creation tool (e.g.,
Software) for a user to virtually pick out and choose (e.g., on
a computer screen) exactly how the user wants the article/
object to fit and look (e.g., prior to the object being printed
using a printer). In some embodiments, the wearable object
is selected and customized from a database of objects (e.g.,
present within the creation tool). In other embodiments, the
wearable object/article is created using software for a more
“one of a kind' item/fit (e.g., fit, appearance and/or feel). In
Some embodiments, the digital measurements are used to fit
a wearable object in a nearly perfect way upon a subjects
body. In other embodiments, the digital measurements are
used to augment a portion of a subject’s body (e.g., a
Subject's shoulders, chest, arms, legs, or other body part). In
Some embodiments, the digital measurements are used to
reduce or slim a portion of a Subject's body (e.g., a subjects waist, stomach, legs (e.g., via printing compression gar
ments based upon a subjects actual, recorded body dimen
sions (e.g., that slim or reduce in appearance the size a
portion of the subjects body). 
US 2016/0349738 A1
0034. Accordingly, the invention provides using infor
mation generated from the virtual image (e.g., shape and
sizing information), to create a wearable article/object in a
first, virtual sense (e.g., using a computer and/or software a
wearable article/object is virtually created) with subsequent
transfer of article/object information to a printer (e.g., a 3D
printer described herein) upon which the customized, wear
able article/object is printed. The printer may be directly
connected to a computer that transfers the article/object
information, or a printer may be remotely located and
accessible via a web-based or cloud-based application. In
some embodiments, the article/object information is directly
imported into software on the printer that executes the
printing of the article/object.
0035. The invention is not limited by the type of article/
object. Indeed, any object/article that is desired to be worn
may be generated utilizing the systems and methods
described herein. The customized, wearable articles may be
a perfect fit or they may be generated in a size that enhances
or reduces the physical appearance of a subject’s body or
body part(s). In some embodiments, the wearable object is
an article traditionally worn as clothing such as, but not
limited to, shirt, blouse, Vest, jacket, Suit, pant, skirt, sock,
hat, underwear, or other type of clothing. In other embodi
ments, the wearable object is an article that is worn during
sport Such as, but not limited to, athletic equipment (e.g., pads, guards (e.g., shin guards), helmets, protective cup.
protective bra, mouth guard, masks, and the like). In still
other embodiments, the article/object is a garment used for
compression (e.g., for patients to wear post-Surgery, or for
Subjects that wish to appear thinner). In some embodiments, the object is a diaper (e.g., an adult diaper). In some
embodiments, the article is a mouth guard. In some embodi
ments, the object/article is a type of armor (e.g., used by a
soldier). In some embodiments, the article is a mask (e.g., to
change identity). In another embodiment, the mask is a
safety mask or respirator (e.g., used to prevent the spread of
infectious disease). In another embodiment, the object is a
type of safety clothing or article (e.g., goggles, hazardous
materials suit, etc.). In still other embodiments, the article is
footwear (e.g., boots (e.g., Snow boots, ski boots, etc.) shoes,
sandals, etc. In some embodiments, the article is a wetsuit or
drysuit. In some embodiments, the object is body armor. In
other embodiments, the object is a body shield (e.g., that
shields a person’s body or portion(s) thereof from electrical
energy, Solar energy, X-ray energy, chemical energy, nuclear
energy, etc). In some embodiments, the object is padding for
a sport Such as Soccer, football, hockey (e.g., ice, field, etc.), rugby, or any contact sport in which protective padding/ guards are permitted.
0036. In some embodiments, a wearable object of the
invention is a splint, cast, brace, or other type of medically
related object (e.g., that is worn to immobilize, stabilize or
align a portion of a Subject’s body). In other embodiments,
the object is a medical tool or device (e.g., customized to fit
a Surgeon’s or other type of doctor's hand (e.g., left or right
hand).
0037 Because women's undergarments are mostly made
for women with A-C cup breast size with body sizes that fall
into the category of Small to large, there are large numbers
of women that do not fall into one of the available sizes and
for these women finding undergarments (e.g., lingerie) that
fit properly is a challenge. Accordingly, in some embodi
Dec. 1, 2016
ments, the wearable object is lingerie that is custom fit to a
woman's body or portion(s) thereof.
0038. In some embodiments, the object/article is manu
factured using a single type of material. However, in other
embodiments, the objet/article comprises multiple types of
material in a single wearable object. In some embodiments, the article/object is made of multiple parts with the same or
different material. The invention is not limited by the type of
article/object comprising two or more different types of
material. Indeed, any object/article described herein may be
manufactured to comprise two or more (e.g., 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80,
90, 100, or more different types of material in the article/
object. For example, in some embodiments, the wearable
object/article is a shirt made/printed with elastic material as
well as Solid/rigid material (e.g., used as structure within
shirt (e.g., to maintain or assist in maintaining a healthy
posture of subject wearing the shirt (e.g., used by individuals
wishing to practice good posture habits or in lieu of a brace
traditionally worn by individuals with spinal scoliosis))). In
other embodiments, customized athletic equipment is manu
factured utilizing the processes and methods of the inven
tion. For example, football, hockey or other type of padding and/or helmets may be manufactured according to the inven
tion Such that the padding objects/articles contain two or
more different types of material (e.g., a rigid, strong outer
layer and a soft, rubber-like soft inner layer). The different
types of materials may be present in a single layer, or, in
other embodiments, different layers are used for each of the
different materials. The thickness (or thinness) of a layer
may be any thickness at which a printer is able to print the
material (e.g., anywhere between about 10 microns to about
5 or more inches thick, although thinner, more fine (e.g., less
than 10 microns thick) as well as thicker (e.g., greater than
5 inches) layers may be used.
0039. The invention is not limited by the type of material
used for printing a wearable object/article. Indeed, the art
knows well that many materials exist for use in printing (e.g., 3D printing). Materials may be any rubber, rigid,
opaque (e.g., an any desired color), transparent, or any other
type of material available in the art. Indeed, any material
available in the art (e.g., carbon fiber, fiberglass, nylon, thermoplastic, rubber, metal, wood, limestone, etc.) may be
utilized in the systems and methods of the invention.
0040. In some embodiments, a material used is specifi cally chosen Such that an object/article, when manufactured
with the material, acts to reflect and/or block means of
sensing (e.g., infrared sensor, heat sensor, biometric sensor,
etc.) the presence and or state of a Subject. In Such a way, a
subject may utilize one or more articles/objects of the
invention in order to remain undetected (e.g., Subject who
wishes his/her presence remains undetected or who wishes
his/her biometric state remains undetected) in certain envi
ronments. Similarly, wigs, masks or other types of articles/
objects may be generated according to the invention and
utilized by a subject in order to elude identification of the
presence and/or biometric state of the subject.
0041. In some embodiments, a material utilized in the
manufacture/printing of an object/article is a stretchable
material. The material utilized in the manufacture/printing
of an object/article may be an antimicrobial material (e.g.,
due to the shape and/or consistency of the material used). In
other embodiments, the material utilized in the manufacture?
printing of an object/article is an absorbent material (e.g., for 
US 2016/0349738 A1
articles/objects that serve as diaper (e.g., adult diaper)). In
Some embodiments, the material utilized in the manufacture/
printing of an object/article is chosen due to its elasticity,
comfort and/or strength. The material utilized in the systems
and methods of the invention (e.g., for printing an article/
object) can be any material capable of being printed that is
available, or that becomes available, in the art.
0042 Printers utilized in the systems and methods of the
invention are known in the art and include, but are not
limited to, printers manufactured, designed, and/or sold by
STRATASYS, Inc., MARK FORG3D, HEWLETT-PACK
ARD, Inc., MAKERBOT, Inc., 3D-SYSTEMS, Corp., The
EXONE Company, VOXELJET AG, GROUP GORGE,
Inc., CAMTEK LTD., ORGANOVO Holdings, Inc., or any other printer provider known in the art.
0043. In some embodiments, articles/objects are created/
customized and printed locally. In other embodiments,
articles objects are created/customized on a user's computer, and then sent to and/or printed at a remote printer (e.g., from
an on-line manufacturing and/or distribution facility).
0044) The methods and systems described herein can be
implemented in numerous ways. In one embodiment, the
methods involve use of a communications infrastructure, for
example the internet. Several embodiments of the invention
are disclosed and described herein (e.g., that utilize the
internet). However, the invention is not so limited. It is also
to be understood that the present invention may be imple
mented in various forms of hardware, software, firmware,
processors, distributed servers (e.g., as used in cloud com
puting) or a combination thereof, whether such computers and/or servers are located locally or accessible over the
internet. The methods and systems described herein can be
implemented as a combination of hardware and software.
The Software can be implemented as an application program
tangibly embodied on a program storage device, or different
portions of the Software implemented in the user's comput
ing environment (e.g., as an applet) and on the 3D printer service computing environment, where the 3D printer ser
Vice may be located at a remote site (e.g., accessible via the
internet) or locally (e.g., over a local area network connec
tion).
0045. For example, during or after acquisition of image
data and/or virtual image (e.g., regarding an object or a
subjects body or portion thereof), portions of the data
processing can be performed in the Subject/user-side com
puting environment. For example, the Subject/user-side
computing environment can be programmed to provide a
virtual object and/or object set (e.g., groups of similar
objects); processing of data (e.g., using a creation tool that
allows customization of the object according to image data
encoded in a virtual image), where the processed data is
transmitted as processed or partially processed responses to
the creation tool of the Subject/user-side computing envi
ronment in the form computer readable Script (e.g., for
Subsequent printing of a customized object (e.g., on a 3D
printer located on a LAN or accessible over the internet).
0046. The programs for executing algorithms described
herein may be uploaded to, and executed by, a machine
comprising any Suitable architecture. In general, the
machine involves a computer platform having hardware
Such as one or more central processing units (CPU), a
random access memory (RAM), and input/output (I/O)
interface(s). The computer platform also includes an oper
ating system and microinstruction code. The various pro
Dec. 1, 2016
cesses and functions described herein may either be part of
the microinstruction code or part of the application program
(or a combination thereof) which is executed via the oper ating system. In addition, various other peripheral devices
may be connected to the computer platform such as an
additional data storage device and a 3D printing device.
0047. As a computer system, the system generally
includes a processor unit. The processor unit operates to
receive information, which generally includes image data
and/or virtual image information (e.g., specific size, shape,
scale, dimension, color, etc.), virtual object/article informa
tion, and/or creation tool information. Information received
can be stored at least temporarily in a database (e.g., locally
or remotely).
0048 Part or all of the input and output data can also be
sent electronically; certain output data can be sent electroni
cally or telephonically (e.g., by facsimile, e.g., using devices
Such as fax back). Exemplary output receiving devices can
include a display element, 3D printer, a facsimile device and
the like. Electronic forms of transmission and/or display can
include email, interactive television, and the like. In some
embodiments, all or a portion of the input data and/or all or
a portion of the output data are maintained on a server for
access. The results may be accessed or sent to third parties (e.g., third party printers) as desired.
0049. A system for use in the methods described herein
generally includes at least one computer processor (e.g.,
where the method is carried out in its entirety at a single site)
or at least two networked computer processors (e.g., where
image data and/or virtual image information are obtained at
one site) and transmitted to a remote site to a second
computer processor for analysis (e.g., a computer that
houses virtual article or article sets, a creation tool, etc.), where the first and second computer processors are con
nected by a network (e.g., via an intranet or internet). The
system can also include a user component(s) for input; and
a reviewer component(s) for review of data, and generation
of reports. Additional components of the system can include
a server component(s); and a database(s) for storing data
(e.g., as in a database of virtual image information and/or
article or article sets or creation tool information). The
computer processors can be processors that are typically
found in personal desktop computers (e.g., IBM, Dell,
Macintosh), portable computers, mainframes, minicomput
ers, tablet computer, Smart phone, or other computing
devices.
0050. The input components can be complete, stand
alone personal computers (e.g., connected to image data
acquisition means (e.g., a 3D scanner, camera, other device
described herein) offering a full range of power and features
to run applications. The user component can operate under
any desired operating system and includes a communication
element (e.g., a modem or other hardware for connecting to
a network using a cellular phone network, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth,
Ethernet, etc.), one or more input devices (e.g., a keyboard,
mouse, keypad, or other device used to transfer information
or commands), a storage element (e.g., a hard drive or other
computer-readable, computer-writable storage medium),
and a display element (e.g., a monitor, television, LCD,
LED, or other display device that conveys information to the
user). The user enters input commands into the computer
processor through an input device. In one embodiment, the
user interface is a graphical user interface (GUI) (e.g., written for web browser applications). 
US 2016/0349738 A1
0051. The server component(s) can be a personal com
puter, a minicomputer, or a mainframe, or distributed across
multiple servers (e.g., as in cloud computing applications)
and offers data management, information sharing between
clients, network administration and security. The application
and any databases used can be on the same or different
servers. Other computing arrangements for the user and
server(s), including processing on a single machine Such as
a mainframe, a collection of machines, or other Suitable
configuration are contemplated. In general, the user and
server machines work together to accomplish the processing
of the present invention.
0052. Where used, a database(s) is usually connected to
a database server component and can be any device which
will hold data. For example, a database can be any magnetic
or optical storing device for a computer (e.g., CDROM,
internal hard drive, tape drive). The database can be located
remote to the server component (with access via a network,
modem, etc.) or locally to the server component.
0053 Accordingly, in some embodiments, the present
invention provides a system, method, and Software that
permits a user to create a customized object/article locally
(e.g., using means described herein for capturing Subject data/information, transfer and/or downloading of the Subject data/information (e.g., regarding a subject’s body or portion
(s) thereof) to a local or remote pc, means described herein
for converting the Subject data/information into a virtual
image (e.g., using a 3D scanner or use of AUTOCAD or
similar software described herein to create a virtual image
on the local pc), means of using the virtual image to create
a customized, virtual article/object on the local pc (e.g.,
using a software/creation tool on the local pc (e.g., that
permits creating an article/object and/or for selecting an
article/object from a list and customizing the article/object
based upon the virtual image), sending the virtual article/
object to a local printer (e.g., connected directly to the local
pc), printing the article/object and Subsequently enjoying the
ability to use (e.g., wear) the article/object (e.g., as shown in
the process flow diagram of FIG. 1).
0054. In some embodiments, the present invention pro vides a system, method, and Software that permit a user to
create a customized object/article (e.g., using means
described herein for capturing Subject data/information,
transfer and/or downloading of the Subject data/information
(e.g., regarding a subject's body or portion(s) thereof) to a
remote data server, means described herein for converting the Subject data/information into a virtual image (e.g., use of a 3D scanner or use of AUTOCAD or similar software
described herein to create a virtual image on the remote data
server), means of using the virtual image to create a cus
tomized, virtual article/object (e.g., using a software/cre
ation tool (e.g., that permits creating an article/object and/or
for selecting an article/object from a list and customizing the
article/object based upon the virtual image), sending the
virtual article/object to a printer (e.g., local and/or remote
printer (e.g., connected via the internet), printing of the
article/object (e.g., locally or remotely), and if printed
remotely, shipping of the article/object to a subject.
0055 For example, as shown in FIG. 2, in some embodi
ments, the system 200 includes a software/creation tool 202
located on a retailer/developer computer 201 used by retail
ers and/or developers of article/objects to create a computer readable script (e.g., encoding the virtual article/object),
described herein, for the customizable article/object. In
Dec. 1, 2016
some embodiments, the software/creation tool 202 com
prises a software program that runs on the developers/
retailer's computer 201, a local pc (e.g., as described above),
or on a server 205 (e.g., a data server) connected (e.g., via
a network (e.g., the internet 230)) to developer's/retailers
computer 201. In some embodiments, the system 200 com
prises a data server 205 that contains subject virtual image
storage 206, virtual article/object storage 207, script storage
208, developer/retailer interface 209 and/or a web server
interface 210. In some embodiments, the software/creation
tool 202 interfaces with the data server 205 via a developer interface 209, whereas a subject desiring object/article (e.g.,
an end user of the system) can use Subjects computer 211
to interface with the data server 205 via the internet 230 and
web server interface 210.
0056. In some embodiments, the system 200 includes a
printforder management server 220 that receives and/or
processes computer-readable Script (e.g., print? order man
agement server 220 receives and processes Script encoding
the virtual article/object (e.g., created by user and/or cus
tomized by user using article/object from a list) and sends
instructions to printer(s) 225 via a printer interface 223 to
print article/object). In some embodiments, the print?order
management server 220 stores script encoding the virtual
article/object in Script storage 221. A subject desiring object/
article (e.g., an end user of the system) 211 can interface
with system 200 via the internet 230 and web server inter
face 224. The printforder management server 220 can inter
face with a retailer via retailer interface 222. The print?order management server 220 may be accessible locally (e.g., directly connected to a subjects computer or available in a
LAN) or be accessible remotely (e.g., via the internet 230).
The invention is not limited by the components of the
features of the system shown in FIG. 2. Indeed, various
systems can be utilized together with the methods and
systems of the invention. For example, in one embodiment,
systems and methods of the invention are utilized together with methods of authenticating or printing an object as
described in U.S. Patent Publication No. 2014.0156053A1, published Jun. 5, 2014.
0057 Similarly, the invention is not limited by the type of
article/object or the way in which a subject utilizes the
systems provided herein. In some embodiments, a retailer/
developer creates one or more virtual articles/objects (e.g.,
a virtual article/object set (e.g., any one or more of which is
customized (e.g., using Subject virtual data and a creation
tool) by a subject/user to create a customized wearable
article/object). The article/object set includes at least one
base article/object image (e.g., virtual image) that can have
Zero or more other graphical features/elements that can be
added to the base article/object image(s). Using software
creation tool 202, a retailer/developer creates a computer readable Script file that specifies how to generate an image
based on article/object image set. In particular, the com
puter-readable script can reference the article/object image
set and specify (i) a plurality of variables that can be inputted
by a user and (ii) the way such variables are used to
customize the article/object. Variables include, but are not
limited to, size, shape, texture, material, layering, etc. (e.g. that can be added to and/or used to modify the article/object
image). In one embodiment, the script file created by devel
oper/retailer includes a default value for each of the vari
ables (e.g., default values based on average size/dimension
in a population, or default values based upon size/dimen 
US 2016/0349738 A1
sions information present in an acquired 3D image of
subjects body or portion thereof). The computer-readable
Script can also include instructions for generating a graphical
user interface via which a user can modify the variable
article/object data in the script. In preferred embodiments,
the computer readable script includes instructions for using
specific dimension and sizing measurement information/
data regarding the part or parts of a Subject obtained from
Subject virtual image/model (e.g., obtained from 3D scanner
and/or from SOLIDWORKS, AUTOCAD or similar soft
ware). In this way the computer readable Script allows a user
to utilize a subject’s image data/information (e.g., Subjects
captured information (e.g., shape, Scale, size, dimensions,
color, etc.) related to a subject’s body or portion(s) thereof
of Subject virtual image/model) to modify/customize (e.g.,
via a graphical user interface) the variable article/object data
in the Script.
0.058. In some embodiments, the software creation tool
202 generates multiple resolutions of the article/object set,
ranging from a high-resolution version (e.g., used for print
ing the article/object) to lower-resolution versions (e.g.,
used for downloading to a web browser). A developer/ retailer can provide the script and article/object set to the
data sever 205 via the developer interface 209, and the data
server 205 can store the script file and article/object set.
0059. In some embodiments, when a user's computer
requests one or more web pages provided by data server 205
via web server interface related to article/object customiza
tion, the data server 205 downloads the script file and the
article/object set with the webpage(s). Users web browser,
in Some embodiments, runs the computer-readable script
and generates a graphical user interface based on the com
puter-readable script. User can modify the variable article/
object data (size, shape, texture, material, layering, etc.) in
the script file via the graphical user interface. In one embodi
ment, generating the graphical user interface includes dis
playing a template, or starting version, for the customizable
article/object using a default setting in the script file. The
user is then able to customize the template via the graphical
user interface. By modifying the template in the graphical
user interface, the user is editing the script file. As the user
makes changes, the changes are illustrated in the graphical
user interface, and saved (e.g., locally or remotely) in the
script file.
0060. In some embodiments, when a user elects to save
the customized article/object, the modified script file is sent
back to data server 205. In some embodiments, when a user
elects to save the customized article/object, the modified
Script file is saved on a local computer (e.g., it is not sent
back to the data server). All user changes are reflected in the
modified script file (user modified script file). In some
embodiments, the data server stores user modified script files for each specific user Such that a user can at Some point
in the future re-access the user modified script file (e.g., in
order to re-order or to re-customize the article/object). In an
alternate embodiment of the invention, every time a user
makes a change to the Script file via the graphical user
interface, the change is automatically saved on the data SeVe.
0061. In some embodiments, a user orders an article/
object. In other embodiments, a user can elect to share the
customized article/object with others (e.g., via the internet).
In some embodiments, in response to a user ordering an
article/object, the printforder management server coordi
Dec. 1, 2016
nates the printing of the article/object using the user modi
fied script file (e.g., stored on the data server). The user
modified script file can be utilized to print the article/object
on any printer accessible to the print/order management
server (e.g., via the internet). In some embodiments, a
unique identifier is created by the print/order management
server to more readily identify a user modified script file
and/or for security (e.g., identification) reasons. In further
embodiments, the unique identifier (e.g., URL) is sent to a
printing vendor (e.g., the print vendor is sent a URL that
includes a unique identifier for a user modified script file)
and the printing vendor prints the article/object only when
the vendor clicks the URL. In some embodiments, a user
directly instruct a vendor's printer to print an article/object
(e.g., encoded by a user modified script (e.g., present on a
data server or on a user's computer)). In other embodiments, a user instructs a vendor that the user would like an
article/object (e.g., encoded by a user modified script (e.g.,
present on a data server or on a user's computer), and the
vendor instructs a vendor's printer to print the article/object.
Once an article/object is printed, any means of shipping the
article/object known in the art can be used to deliver the
article/object (e.g., to a user or elsewhere (e.g., using cou
riers such as DHL, FEDEX, UPS, USPS, or other courier)).
0062. In another embodiment, a retailer, merchant or
other type of provider can provide and/or charge a user for
any one or more of the various steps of the methods
described herein. For example, a retailer, in one embodi
ment, can make available to a user a virtual article/object set
(e.g., via a website) for a charge. In another embodiment, a
retailer can allow a user to print an article on a retailer’s 3D
printer (e.g., accessed via the internet) and Subsequently ship
the printed article to the user. The invention is not limited by the means used to pay for the article/object. Indeed, any
means known in the art can be used including, but not
limited to, cash, check, credit card, PAYPAL, BITCOIN, or
the like. For example, to the extent that a subject interacts
with other servers and/or computers (e.g., via the internet),
servers and/or computers may contain Software and/or prod
ucts that monitor, record and invoice a Subject for work
performed on the server/computer or connected peripherals
(e.g., printing of article/garment on a 3D printer), and/or for
the shipping of materials.
0063 Various modifications and variations of the
described compositions and methods of the invention will be
apparent to those skilled in the art without departing from
the scope and spirit of the invention. Although the invention
has been described in connection with specific preferred
embodiments, it should be understood that the invention as
claimed should not be unduly limited to such specific
embodiments. Indeed, various modifications of the
described modes for carrying out the invention that are
obvious to those skilled in the relevant fields are intended to
be within the scope of the present invention.
1-65. (canceled)
66. A method of manufacturing a customized wearable
article comprising:
a) providing a Subject;
b) utilizing a 3D scanner or a camera to obtain image data
regarding the Subject's body or portion thereof,
wherein the image data comprises information selected
from shape, size, scale and dimension; 
US 2016/0349738 A1
c) creating a virtual image of the Subject's body or portion
thereof using the image data regarding the Subjects
body or portion thereof;
d) selecting a virtual wearable article from an article set;
e) customizing the virtual wearable article utilizing the
virtual image of the Subject; and
f) printing the article using a three dimensional (3D) printer.
67. The method of claim 66, wherein the image data
regarding the Subject's body or portion thereof acquired by
the 3D scanner is transferred to a computer aided design (CAD) program.
68. The method of claim 67, wherein the CAD program is used to modify the image data of the virtual image.
69. The method of claim 68, wherein the modified image data of the virtual image is utilized to customize features of
the virtual wearable article.
70. The method of claim 66, wherein the article comprises
a single type of material, two or more types of material, and/or two or more layers.
71. The method of claim 66, wherein a creation tool is
utilized to create a computer readable script that includes
information regarding the virtual image.
72. The method of claim 71, wherein the computer
readable script identifies the virtual wearable article from the
article set and utilizes the image data of the virtual image to
customize the virtual wearable article.
73. The method of claim 71, wherein the computer readable script encodes a graphical user interface through
which a user can modify virtual wearable article data in the
computer readable script.
74. A method of creating a customized wearable article
comprising:
a) obtaining image data regarding a Subject’s body or
portion thereof using a 3D scanner;
Dec. 1, 2016
b) creating a virtual image of the Subject’s body or portion
thereof, wherein the virtual image is stored on a remote
data server,
c) creating a virtual customized wearable article using information encoded in the virtual image, wherein the
creating utilizes Software, located on a local computer or on a remote retailer's server accessible via the
internet, that modifies a virtual wearable article with
information selected from size, shape, Scale and dimen
sion encoded within the virtual image; and
d) printing the virtual customized wearable article on a 3D
printer to create the customized wearable article.
75. The method of claim 74, wherein information encod
ing the virtual wearable article is stored on a retailer's data SeVe.
76. A customized wearable article generated by the
method of claim 74.
77. A method of creating a customized wearable article
comprising:
obtaining a 3D virtual image of the surface of a subjects
body or portion thereof using a 3D scanner;
modifying the 3D virtual image in order to augment,
reduce or otherwise change a feature of the subjects
body or portion thereof, wherein the feature is selected
from the size of the subjects waist, the size of the
Subject's chest, and the Subject's biometric State; and
utilizing the modified 3D virtual image to manufacture the
customized wearable article.
78. The method of claim 77, wherein the customized
wearable article reduces the apparent size of the subject's waist when worn by the Subject; augments the apparent size
of the subject’s chest when worn by the subject; or inhibits
detection of the subject’s biometric state when worn by the
Subject. 