US010507592B2( 12 ) United States Patent ( 10 ) Patent No .: US 10,507,592 B2Höchsmann et al. (4 5 ) Date of Patent : Dec. 17 , 2019( 54 ) 3D PRINTER( 71 ) Applicant : ExOne GmbH , Gersthofen ( DE )( 72 ) Inventors : Rainer Höchsmann , Langenneufnach( DE ) ; Alexander Müller ,Diedorf - Vogelsang ( DE ) ; Sven Klaua ,Augsburg ( DE )( 52 ) U.S. CI .CPC B28B 1/001 ( 2013.01 ) ; B28B 1/004( 2013.01 ) ; B29C 64/165 ( 2017.08 ) ; B29C64/20 ( 2017.08 ) ; B29C 64/245 ( 2017.08 ) ;B33Y 10/00 ( 2014.12 ) ; B33Y 30/00 ( 2014.12 )( 58 ) Field of Classification SearchCPC B28B 1/001 ; B28B 1/004 ; B29C 64/245 ;B29C 64/20 ; B29C 64/165 ; B33Y 30/00 ;B33Y 10/00( 73 ) Assignee : ExOne GmbH , Gersthofen (D E ) See application file for complete search history .( * ) Notice : Subject to any disclaimer , the term of this ( 56 ) References Citedpatent is extended or adjusted under 35U.S.C. 154 ( b ) by 0 days . U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS(2 1 ) Appl. No .: 16 /4 03,807 2019/0143601 A1 * 5/2019 Jung B33Y 10/00264/497B29C 64/106( 22 ) Filed : May 6 , 2019 B29C 48/02 2019/0168443 A1 *2019/0255755 Al *6/2019 Wohlgemuth8/2019 Mandel( 65 ) Prior Publication Data * cited by examinerUS 2019/0255733 A1 Aug. 22 , 2019 Primary Examiner Nahida Sultana( 74 ) Attorney , Agent , or Firm — Thomas Lizzi( 63 )Related U.S. Application DataContinuation of application No. 15 / 506,317 , filed asapplication No. PCT / EP2015 / 069505 on Aug. 26 ,2015 , now Pat . No. 10,286,571 .( 30 ) Foreign Application Priority DataAug. 29 , 2014 ( DE ) 10 2014 112 447( 57 ) ABSTRACTA 3D printer is described which is configured to build up athree - dimensional component in layers by forming layers ofparticulate construction material lying one upon the otherand by selectively solidifying a partial region of the respective construction material layer . The 3D printer is configuredto build up one or more first three - dimensional componentsin a first construction space and simultaneously one or moresecond three - dimensional components in a second construction space which is arranged adjacent to the first construction space . The 3D printer has a coating device arrangementwhich is displaceable across the first and the second construction space and a printing device which is displaceableacross the first and the second construction space .( 51 ) Int . Ci .B29C 64/20B24B 1/00B28B 1/00B29C 64/165B29C 64/245B33Y 30/00B33Y 10/00( 2017.01 )( 2006.01 )( 2006.01 )( 2017.01 )( 2017.01 )( 2015.01 )( 2015.01 ) 17 Claims , 17 Drawing Sheets6052Xo7824 Gil32 22U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 1 of 17 US 10.507,592 B2F1.ig38?? ?, 32F(??2??TEi 2?THU.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 2 of 17 US 10,507,592 B2.2F.ig3(3)40 22 oy2 EC?32 ( 0 )352346?U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 3 of 17 US 10,507,592 B2stF3.ig25?2,022412hi8o32U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 4 of 17 US 10,507,592 B2F4.ig 7825100 ot202209*****0832U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 5 of 17 US 10,507,592 B2F.5ig52 n10020DaddyWanteU.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 6 of 17 US 10,507,592 B2F.6ig20?.ISU.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 7 of 17 US 10,507,592 B27.Fig20SystemWAAU17U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 8 of 17 US 10,507,592 B2F8.ig52?.32IU.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 9 of 17 US 10,507,592 B29.Fig25U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 10 of 17 US 10,507,592 B21.Fi0g en400 25??ZgHA W732U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 11 of 17 US 10,507,592 B21.Fi1g100*** hortsvrhU.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 12 of 17 US 10,507,592 B21.Fpio2dcge59I* man ** WW *52U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 13 of 17 US 10,507,592 B21.Fwoio3ng5232U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 14 of 17 US 10,507,592 B21F.i4g2 M?218131AtiviYY8200120U.S. Patent1.Fi5g??Mo06Z2oo0 0-130400110110Dec. 17 , 2019140A1.-6ig8"2?84Sheet 15 of 178229206198194)-80130waIiI4I0US 10,507,592 B21001U.S. Patent Dec. 17.2019 Sheet 16 of 17 US 10,507,592 B2< 343698321.Fi7gCopowa 377U.S. Patent Dec. 17 , 2019 Sheet 17 of 17 US 10,507,592 B23,42 87Lirl?? 2AS40OU.?1.Fi8gUS 10,507,592 B21 23D PRINTER example to span or to cover the length or width of arectangular construction field . The opening may then beThe present invention relates to a 3D printer , a 3D printer provided as a longitudinal slot . The coating device can thusarrangement having at least one such 3D printer and a be moved horizontally across the construction field and atgenerative manufacturing process . 5 the same time output particulate construction material fromVarious generative manufacturing processes ( and conse the opening onto the construction field to thereby apply aquently various types of 3D printers ) are known . uniform layer over the entire surface of the constructionSome generative manufacturing processes have the fol field .lowing steps in common : In the above step ( 2 ) , a printing device having a print head( 1 ) First , particulate material is applied over the entire 10 may for example be used , which applies a treatment agent insurface of a construction field , so as to form a layer of a controlled way onto a subarea of the construction materialunsolidified particulate material . layer applied before . The treatment agent contributes to a( 2 ) The applied layer of unsolidified particulate material solidification of the construction material layer in the subis selectively solidified in a predetermined partial area , for area . For example , the treatment agent may be a binder , forexample by selectively printing a treatment agent , for 15 example a binder component of a multicomponent binder .example a binder ( alternatively , for example , by laser sin Alternatively , a laser may , for example , be used in thetering ) above step ( 2 ) to solidify a subarea of the construction( 3 ) Steps ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) are repeated to manufacture a desired material layer applied previously , for example by sinteringcomponent . For this purpose , a construction platform on or melting the construction material in the subarea .which the component is built up in layers may , for example , 20 Particulate construction material within the meaning ofbe lowered by respectively one layer thickness before a new this application may be understood as a construction matelayer is applied over the entire surface ( alternatively , the rial comprising at least one kind of particulate material ( forcoating device and the printing device may , for example , be example ( grains of ) sand , for example foundry sand , and / orraised by respectively one layer thickness ) . metal particles and / or particles of synthetic material ) . Sev( 4 ) Finally , the manufactured component which is sup- 25 eral different types of particulate material may be includedported and surrounded by loose , unsolidified particulate in the construction material as well , such as a mixture of newmaterial may be unpacked . sand and recycled sand or a mixture of fine sand and coarseThe construction space in which the component or the sand or a mixture of two different types of sand . Moreover ,components is / are manufactured may , for example , be the construction material may comprise at least one liquiddefined by a so - called construction box ( also referred to as 30 component , for example a binder component , for example“ job box ” ) . A construction box of this type may have a an activator , and / or one or more solid and / or liquid addicircumferential wall structure which is open in an upward tives . In case that the construction material contains a binderdirection and extends in a vertical direction ( for example component , another binder component , such as furan resin ,formed by four vertical side walls ) , which may , for example , may selectively be printed onto a previously applied conbe formed to be rectangular when viewed from above . A 35 struction material layer by means of a printing device , so asheight - adjustable construction platform may be received in to solidify this layer in a predetermined area . Depending onthe construction box . In this respect , the space above the the component to be manufactured , for example a castingconstruction platform and between the vertical circumfer mold or a foundry core , a construction material compositionential wall structure may for example at least contribute to specifically prepared for this purpose may be used . In thisforming the construction space . An upper area of the con- 40 respect , the construction material composition may bestruction space may , for example , be referred to as construc defined by the number of components used as well as by thetion field . An example of such a construction box is , for respective type and the respective share of componentsexample , described in DE 10 2009 056 696 A1 . contained in the construction material ( mixture ) .A coating device arrangement having a coating device A 3D printer having two construction boxes is already( also referred to as a “ recoater ” ) is normally used in the 45 known from the above - mentioned document . However , theabove step ( 1 ) . Various coating device arrangements are 3D printer can always receive only one of the two construcknown for use in 3D printers , by means of which a particu tion boxes and therefore can always perform only onelate construction material may be applied to the construction construction job ( = generative manufacturing of one or morefield ( also referred to as construction surface or construction components in an assigned construction space ) . However ,area ) in the form of a uniform layer over the entire surface . 50 the two construction boxes are able to reduce the period ofOne type of coating device arrangement uses a roller time between a first construction job and a second construc( short : “ roller coating device ” ) in front of which first an tion job , during which the plant or the printer is out ofamount of particulate construction material is put down and operation or does not print ( for example to remove thewhich is then horizontally moved across the construction construction box , to unpack the pieces contained therein andfield to apply the particulate construction material in the 55 to prepare the construction box for the next construction job ,form of a uniform layer onto the construction field . In this etc. ) .respect , the roller may be rotated opposite to the moving DE 102009036153 A1 discloses a device for generativelydirection . Coating device arrangements with great lengths manufacturing three - dimensional formed parts of powderyare difficult to realize using a roller coating device . construction material by introducing radiation energy , havAnother kind of coating device arrangement ( a so - called 60 ing a construction space which is divided in two construccoating device arrangement having a " container coating tion space portions , wherein the construction space portionsdevice ” , for example a “ slot coating device ” ) uses a coating respectively receive a swap container , wherein the device isdevice with a container which is displaceable across a configured as an open portal open on both sides , wherein theconstruction field and defines an inner cavity for receiving swap containers can be loaded and / or removed from bothparticulate construction material which leads to an opening 65 open portal sides or can be fed through the portal , andfor outputting the particulate construction material onto the wherein swap containers are container - like arrangementsconstruction field . The coating device may be elongate , for which include a construction platform that can be lowered ,US 10,507,592 B23 4onto which powder can be coated in layers , and which are which a respective construction job is performed , the 3Dadditionally provided with a powder handling arrangement , printer having two ( or more ) construction spaces accordingi.e. comprise a powder storing tank , a coating device and a to the invention may increase the output at reasonable costs ,powder overflow tank . as for example a common / shared housing , a common frameIt may be considered as an object of the present invention 5 structure , a common control or a common control cabinet , ato provide a 3D printer and a generative manufacturing common print head , a common coating device feedingmethod which enable to increase the output . device , etc. may be used ( for example one or more or all ofThe present invention provides a 3D printer according to said common components ) , i.e. a plurality of componentsclaim 1 , a 3D printer arrangement according to claim 15 may be saved which would otherwise have to be providedhaving at least one such 3D printer , and a generative 10 twice ( or a number of times ) .manufacturing process according to claim 17. Further According to various embodiments , a 3D printer is conembodiments according to the invention are described in the figured to build up a three - dimensional component , for respective dependent claims . example a casting mold or a foundry core , in layers , byBy way of illustration , according to various embodiments forming layers of particulate construction material , forof the invention , the capacity and consequently also the 15 example containing sand particles , lying one upon the otheroutput of the 3D printer may be increased as the manufac and by selectively solidifying a partial area of the respectiveturing is not limited to a single construction space but as , if construction material layer .required , it is possible to simultaneously manufacture in two In this respect , the 3D printer is configured ( for example( or more ) construction spaces using the 3D printer , i.e. to formed and / or designed and / or structured and / or prosimultaneously perform two ( or more ) construction jobs 20 grammed ) to build up one or more first three - dimensionalusing the 3D printer . components in a first construction space arranged in the 3DBy way of illustration , according to various embodiments printer and , simultaneously , one or more second threeof the invention , the subdivision into a first and a second dimensional components in a second construction spaceconstruction space instead of providing a single , compara which is arranged adjacent to the first construction space attively large construction space , allows that the quality of the 25 a horizontal distance therefrom in the 3D printer .components to be manufactured may be maintained appro In other words , two or more construction jobs may bepriately ( i.e. that the quality does not decline as the capacity carried out simultaneously using the 3D printer according toor the output increase ) , for example at justifiable costs the invention , namely in two or more adjacent constructionand / or a justifiable complexity . In this respect , it should be spaces arranged at a horizontal distance from each other . Inconsidered that the respective length that a coating device 30 this respect , the 3D printer itself may for example bearrangement or printing device may span continuously with referred to as a common / shared 3D printer with respect toout a decline in quality of the component ( for example as a the first and the second construction space , as one or moreresult of a deflection of a coating device component , such as of its components ( for example print head and / or coatinga coating device blade for stroking output construction device feeding device and / or housing and / or plant frame )material ) is limited in practice ( in particular , at justifiable 35 may be used collectively by / for both the first constructioncosts and / or justifiable complexity ) . By way of illustration , space ( to perform the first construction job ) and the secondbecause of the subdivision into a first and a second con construction space ( to perform the second construction job )struction space the coating device arrangement may also be or may be assigned to both construction spaces .segmented correspondingly for example . Using several coat I.e. , the 3D printer is configured to build up a first layering devices for a single , large construction space may in 40 stack in the first construction space , which contains the atcontrast be a problem as it is then no longer possible or at least one first component , and simultaneously to build up aleast highly difficult to apply a uniform layer ( especially second layer stack in the second construction space , whichbetween the two coating devices ) . contains the at least one second component , the first and theBy way of illustration , according to various embodiments second layer stack being arranged to be separate from eachof the invention , the subdivision into a first and a second 45 other in the 3D printer .construction space instead of providing a single , compara The horizontal distance between two adjacent constructively large construction space , further allows that the tion spaces may , for example , be less than or equal to 1.5 m ,increase in capacity and / or output is not at the cost of for example less than or equal to 1.4 m , for example less thanmanageability / handling , as two separate construction spaces or equal to 1.3 m , for example less than or equal to 1.2 m ,( for example formed by two separate construction boxes ) are 50 for example less than or equal to 1.1 m , for example less thansignificantly easier to handle than one large construction or equal to 1.0 m , for example less than or equal to 0.9 m ,space . For example , unpacking the components from a large for example less than or equal to 0.8 m , for example less thanconstruction space may be a problem insofar as an operator or equal to 0.7 m , for example less than or equal to 0.6 m ,of the plant might be unable to reach components arranged for example less than or equal to 0.5 m , for example less thanin the middle of the construction space without using tools , 55 or equal to 0.4 m , for example less than or equal to 0.3 m ,whereas two separate construction spaces may allow an for example less than or equal to 0.2 m .ergonomic unpacking of all components from the respective The horizontal distance between two adjacent construcconstruction space . tion spaces may , for example , be used to ( for exampleAccording to various embodiments of the invention , the additionally ) fix ( for example on a linear guiding structure ) ,first construction job to be performed in the first construction 60 for example to support ( for example on a linear guidingspace and the second construction job to be performed in the structure ) , a coating device arrangement of the 3D printersecond construction space may be performed comparatively ( an example of this coating device arrangement will befast as a result of a smart arrangement of the coating device described later in detail ) in the space formed by the horiarrangement and / or printing device , for example with rea zontal distance . For example , each of a first and a secondsonable effort and / or at reasonable costs . 65 coating device of the coating device arrangement ( anCompared to an arrangement with two ( or more ) separate example of these coating devices will be described later in3D printers providing a respective construction space in detail ) may be fixed ( for example supported ) between theUS 10,507,592 B25 6two adjacent construction spaces ( for example additionally ) , unsolidified particulate material , whereas the constructionfor example to a respectively separate linear guidance / slide platform may remain in the construction box .or to a common linear guidance / slide . The linear guiding The first and / or the second construction platform may , forstructure or the separate linear guidances / slides or the com example , be accommodated in an associated constructionmon linear guidance / slide may , in turn , be fixed to a portion 5 box . This has proven appropriate in practice ; alternatively , aof a common frame structure of the 3D printer . component or a layer stack including the component may ,For example , the 3D printer may comprise a common however , also be built on the construction platform , free inframe structure in which both the first construction space a peripheral direction .and the second construction space are arranged , and which A horizontal distance between the construction platextends with a portion thereof between two adjacent con- 10 forms — when these are in the respective construction platstruction spaces , i.e. in the space formed by the horizontal form construction position may be identical with the abovedistance . For example , components of the 3D printer may be horizontal distance between the construction spaces .fixed to this portion of the frame structure , for example the According to various embodiments , the 3D printer may ,above - mentioned coating device arrangement or a linear for example , comprise a first construction box and a secondguiding structure thereof . 15 construction box and may be configured to receive the firstThe first construction space and / or the second construc construction box and the second construction box simultation space may , for example , be arranged at a respectively neously , for example at a distance from each other in adefined ( by the 3D printer ) and / or predetermined position in horizontal direction , in a respectively associated , separatethe 3D printer . For example , the ( common ) frame structure first and second construction box construction position ,may contribute to specify the first and the second construc- 20 respectively , in which the respective construction box istion space . For example , the 3D printer may comprise one or arranged within the 3D printer for building the at least onemore plant - fixed construction field limitations per construc component by means of the 3D printer in the first and secondtion space , extending in a horizontal direction , which sur construction space , respectively , defined by the respectiveround the construction field of the respective construction construction box , so that respectively one or more compospace at least in part . For example , at least one plant - fixed 25 nents may be built up in layers simultaneously in the firstconstruction field limitation extending in a horizontal direc construction box and the second construction box .tion may be provided per construction space , which extends In other words , the respective construction space may , foralong any one of the later described short and long sides . example , be at least co - formed by an associated constructionAccording to various embodiments , the 3D printer may , box , for example at least co - formed at least circumferenfor example , comprise a first construction platform and a 30 tially . In this respect , the respective construction box may ,second construction platform and may be configured to for example , be provided to be stationary in the plant or mayreceive the first construction platform and the second con be configured to be movable . In the latter case , the respectivestruction platform simultaneously ( for example at a distance construction box defines the associated construction spacefrom each other in a horizontal direction ; alternatively , for when in its related construction box construction position .example , in an adjoining way , wherein , for example , one or 35 In other words , the 3D printer may be configured as aboth of the construction platforms is / are greater than their multi - box 3D printer according to this embodiment , whichassociated construction space in a top view ) in a respectively is able to receive several construction boxes at the sameassociated first and second construction platform construc time , for example in a respective , defined / predeterminedtion position , respectively , separate from each other ( i.e. , construction box receiving space .different from each other ) , in which the respective construc- 40 It should be understood that the number of constructiontion platform is arranged within the 3D printer for building boxes which can be received simultaneously in the 3Dup the at least one component by means of the 3D printer , printer may further be increased , for example to three , four ,and in which the first construction space is formed / arranged five , six or more construction boxes . The same applies to theabove the first construction platform and the second con above - described construction platforms and generally to thestruction space is formed / arranged above the second con- 45 construction spaces .struction platform . The first construction platform and the The construction platforms and / or the construction boxessecond construction platform may delimit the respective may , for example , be formed identical .construction space for example in a downward direction . In According to various embodiments , the first constructionother words , the respective construction space may , for box and / or the second construction box may , for example ,example , be at least co - defined by an associated construction 50 comprise a peripheral wall structure extending in a verticalplatform . direction , which delimits a respective construction boxIn this regard , the respective construction platform may ,for example , be provided to be stationary in the plant , i.e. to For example , in the construction box interior spacebe optionally adjustable as to its height but otherwise defined by the respective construction box , a first or secondstationary ( in its construction platform construction posi- 55 construction platform extending in a horizontal directiontion ) , or may be configured to be movable ( for example by may be provided , wherein for example a first or secondbeing received in a movable construction box or by being construction space is defined by the respective constructionmovably guided on a rail system ) . In the latter case , the box interior space above the respective construction platrespective construction platform may , for example , delimit form , which is open in an upward direction , in which at leastthe related construction space in a downward direction when 60 one component may be built by means of the 3D printer ,in its related construction platform construction position . when the construction box is in its respectively associatedA plate - shaped structure may , for example , be disposed on construction box construction position .the construction platform ( or in the lower area of the According to various embodiments , the first constructionconstruction space ) which is removed from the construction platform and / or the second construction platform may , forbox after the component has been manufactured , together 65 example , be height - adjustable , so that the respective conwith the particulate material fill and the component , in order struction platform may be lowered gradually for building ato unpack the component from the particulate material fill of component , for example by a respective layer thickness . Theinterior space .US 10,507,592 B27 8respective construction platform may , for example , be low tion box may for example , according to various embodiered by means of a respectively assigned plant - fixed lift ments , be movable between their respective constructiondrive or by means of its own lift drive , integrated in the position and an additional position in which the respectiverespective construction box . I.e. , according to various construction platform or construction box is arranged outembodiments , the respective construction space may be 5 side the 3D printer ( and is , for example , easily accessible forexpanded gradually by gradually lowering the related con a user ) . This allows , for example , to facilitate an unpackingstruction platform during the construction process , or may process of the at least one component from the associatedrather “ grow ” together with the component to be manufac construction box .tured . Gradually lowering the construction platform has The respective construction box may , for example , beproven appropriate in practice ; alternatively , a component or 10 movable via an associated roller conveyor into and out of itsa layer stack including this component may , however , also associated construction box construction position . Thebe built by for example gradually lifting the printing device respective roller conveyor ( or an alternative constructionand the coating device arrangement . box feeding device ) may , in turn , be connected with aThe first and / or the second construction space ( for common , driverless transport system , by means of which theexample the first and / or the second construction platform or 15 first and the second construction box may be moved to thethe first and / or the second construction box ) have two long additional position .sides and two short sides in a top view . For example , the first In the case of a movable construction box , the 3D printerand / or the second construction space ( for example the first may , for example , be configured to align and / or fix theand / or the second construction platform or the first and / or respective construction box in the associated constructionthe second construction box ) may be configured to be 20 box construction position by means of an alignment and / orrectangular in a top view . For example , the respective short fixing mechanism .side of the first and / or the second construction space ( for The additional position may , for example , be an unpackexample of the first and / or the second construction platform ) ing position in which the construction box or rather themay have a dimension of less than or equal to 2 m , for components contained therein are unpacked ( manually or inexample less than or equal to 1.8 m , for example less than 25 an automated way ) and / or a construction box stock positionor equal to 1.6 m , for example less than or equal to 1.5 m , in which one or more construction boxes are kept in stock .for example less than or equal to 1.4 m , for example less than The 3D printer comprises a coating device arrangementor equal to 1.3 m . The dimension may , for example , be which is displaceable across the first and the second congreater than or equal to 0.5 m , for example greater than or struction space in a first horizontal direction ( i.e. forequal to 0.6 m , for example greater than or equal to 0.7 m , 30 example across the first and the second construction box iffor example greater than or equal to 0.8 m , for example these are in a respectively associated construction position ) ,greater than or equal to 0.9 m , for example greater than or to supply the first and the second construction space withequal to 1.0 m . The exemplary values of the lower and upper construction material in the form of a respectively uniformthresholds may be combined in any way in this regard , for construction material layer of the construction material to beexample as follows : 0.5 to 2 m , 0.6 to 1.6 m or 1 m to 1.3 35 solidified . The coating device arrangement may , form . If more than 2 construction spaces , for example at least example , be configured to supply the first and the second3 , for example at least 4 , for example at least 5 , for example construction space in parallel with construction material .at least 6 construction spaces are provided , the data provided The coating device arrangement may , for example , be conmay apply to all construction spaces . figured as a bidirectional coating device arrangement , i.e. asWith the described configuration of the first and / or the 40 a coating device arrangement which may apply a uniformsecond construction space , on the one hand the handling of construction material layer both on a journey and on a returnthe respective construction space can be facilitated , for journey .example an ergonomic unpacking of the respective construc The first horizontal direction is perpendicular to the longtion space or of the respective construction box can be sides and / or parallel to the short sides . Hereby , a quickallowed . In addition a fast manufacturing of the components 45 manufacturing of the component can be achieved .can be provided by the described configuration , especially if According to various embodiments , the coating devicethe coating device arrangement travels in a direction per arrangement may , for example , comprise a first coatingpendicular to the long side for applying a layer , so that it has device which is assigned to the first construction space , andto travel only a comparatively short distance . The speed of a second coating device which is separate therefrom , whichthe coating device arrangement may be a limiting factor and 50 is assigned to the second construction space . In this respect ,may , for example , be less than the speed at which a print the first and the second coating device may be movable overhead is moved . their associated construction space in a respective firstAccording to various embodiments , the first and the horizontal direction , for example in first horizontal direcsecond construction space ( for example the first and / or the tions parallel to each other , for example together or sepasecond construction platform or the first and / or the second 55 rately .construction box ) may , for example , be arranged adjacent to In this respect , the segmentation into a first and a secondeach other along a respective short side , for example sub coating device allows a quick forming of uniform layers forstantially along the entire respective short side . For example , the construction spaces of an appropriate quality , forthe first and the second construction space ( for example the example at justifiable costs and / or having a justifiable comfirst and / or the second construction platform or the first 60 plexity .and / or the second construction box ) may be arranged with According to various embodiments , the first and / or therespect to each other in such a way that substantially the second coating device may , for example , respectively comaltogether four short sides are parallel to each other and prise a container ( for example an elongated container ) whichrespectively two long sides ( one of each construction space ) defines an inner cavity for receiving particulate constructionare in extension to each other . 65 material , which leads to an opening ( for example a longiAs already suggested above , the first and / or the second tudinal slot ) for outputting the particulate construction mateconstruction platform or the first and / or the second construc rial onto the construction field of the respective construction20US 10,507,592 B29 10space . The first and / or the second coating device may thus , second construction space , for example in a longitudinalfor example , be configured as " container coating devices ” , direction of the respective construction space . The carrierfor example as “ slot coating devices ” . The elongated first structure may , for example , be fixed to the common framecoating device / container and the elongated second coating structure of the 3D printer .device / container may be arranged parallel to each other , for 5 The second horizontal direction is perpendicular to theexample in extension to each other or in a longitudinal first horizontal direction in which the coating devicedirection one after another . arrangement is movable , and / or is perpendicular to the shortFor example , a closing device may respectively be dis sides of the construction spaces and / or is parallel to the longposed on the first coating device and / or the second coating sides .device ( for example comprising one or more inflatable 10 The printing device ( for example the print head thereof )hollow bodies which in their inflated state close the opening , may , for example , be movable / displaceable besides theor a sliding mechanism ) , which is configured to selectively second horizontal direction additionally in the first horizonclose the opening for outputting the particulate construction tal direction , so that the printing device ( for example thematerial , for example in a controlled way , i.e. by means of print head thereof ) is movable in an altogether meanderingan electronic control unit . 15 pattern , for example in a U - shape , across the two construcFor example , a stroking member may respectively be tion spaces . It is , however , also possible that the printingattached to the first coating device and / or the second coating device ( for example the print head thereof ) extends fordevice , which is configured to stroke particulate construc example across the entire construction space width or coverstion material output from the opening , to thereby level the same .and / or compress the output particulate material . According to various embodiments , the common printingFor example , the first coating device and the second device may , for example , comprise a common print headcoating device may be connected to each other in a fixed having one or more printing nozzles .way , so that they are movable across the first construction The common print head may , for example , be configuredspace or the second construction space together . to serve both the first construction space and the secondThe 3D printer comprises a common printing device 25 construction space . I.e. , the first construction space and thewhich is displaceable across the first and the second con second construction space are selectively printed on usingstruction space in a second horizontal direction , to selec the same print head , for example using the same printingtively solidify a subarea of a previously applied construction nozzles .material layer of the respective construction space by a The common print head may , for example , span a portion ,controlled output of a flowable treatment agent . The printing 30 for example substantially the half , or the entire length /device may , for example , be configured to sequentially dimension of a respective short side of the constructionsupply the first construction space and the second construc spaces with its printing nozzles . I.e. , the print head may havetion space with treatment agent . In this respect , the printing a trea ent agent output region formed by the printingdevice may , for example , first process the first construction nozzles , the dimension ( for example length ) of which corspace entirely ( for example travel across the same com- 35 responds to a portion , for example substantially the half , orpletely ) , to subsequently process the second construction the entire length / dimension of a respective short side .space entirely . Alternatively , the printing device may , for The common print head may , for example , be arranged inexample , first process a part of the first construction space , a vertical direction at a distance from the coating devicethen process a part of the second construction space , then arrangement , for example the first coating device and theprocess another part of the second construction space , and 40 second coating device , and may be movable horizontally inthen process another part of the first construction space a separate horizontal plane .( bidirectional processing ) . Further alternatively , the printing According to various embodiments , the 3D printer may ,device may , for example , first process a part of the first for example , comprise a common coating device feedingconstruction space , then process a part of the second con unit integrated in the 3D printer , which is arranged in astruction space , then process another part of the first con- 45 vertical direction above the first and the second coatingstruction space , and then process another part of the second device , and / or by which both the first and the second coatingconstruction space ( unidirectional processing ) . device can be supplied with construction material ( forThe treatment agent contributes to selectively solidifying example a respective supply container of the coating device ,the subarea and may , for example , be a binding agent , for which is disposed over the above container of the respectiveexample a binder component of a multi - component binder . 50 coating device ) , and / or comprising a common mixing unit ,In other words , the first and the second construction area for example comprising a common mixing container havingare served by a common or rather the same printing device , an agitator , wherein construction material prepared in thefor example by a common or rather the same print head . mixing container can be fed to the first and the secondThe common printing device may , for example , comprise coating device by a branching feeding structure , if they area linear guiding structure ( for example a continuous linear 55 moved into a respective filling position .guiding structure ) , the length of which is substantially According to various embodiments , the 3D printer may ,greater than or equal to the sum of the first construction for example , comprise a common frame structure in whichspace length and the second construction space length and / or both the first construction space and the second constructionwhich substantially extends entirely along the first and the space are arranged , and / or a common housing in which bothsecond construction space ( for example over the same or 60 the first construction space and the second constructionlaterally next to the same ) , for example in a longitudinal space are arranged . The housing may , for example , comprisedirection of the respective construction space . Therefore , a a continuous housing portion or wall portion covering bothcommon print head ( see below ) is able to serve both the first the first and the second construction space , for exampleconstruction space and the second construction space . The respectively predominantly , for example respectivelylinear guiding structure may , for example , be fixed to a 65 entirely . The common frame structure may , for example , becarrier structure ( for example a continuous carrier structure ) formed continuous or rather connected . The common framewhich extends above or laterally next to the first and the structure and / or the common housing may , for example ,US 10,507,592 B211 12serve at least in sections both the first construction space and Using the described method , a first construction job in athe second construction space or may be used by these or first construction space and a second construction job in amay be assigned to these . second construction space may be executed simultaneously ,For example , the 3D printer may comprise a common i.e. overlapping in time , using a common or rather the samecontrol cabinet . 5 3D printer . The first construction job and the second conAccording to various embodiments , the 3D printer may , struction job may , for example , take the same period of timefor example , comprise a first and a second construction box insertion opening which are for example provided on a or may take different times, in which case the second common side ( for example peripheral side) of the 3D printer construction job is executed alone upon completion of a first and / or formed in a common side wall of the 3D printer . The 10 one of the two construction jobs. The above -d escribed 3D printer or its housing may , for example , comprise a front coating device of the finished construction job can then beand a rear side wall as well as two lateral side walls which “ switched off ” , and the above - described common printingare configured to be longer than the front and the rear side device can then focus on the second construction job alone .wall , wherein the first and the second construction box The construction box assigned to the first construction jobinsertion opening are provided in one of the two lateral side 15 may then also be already removed for an unpacking process .walls . The first and the second construction job may , for example ,According to various embodiments , a 3D printer arrange be started together or may alternatively be started one afterment may , for example , comprise : the other , i.e. a second construction job may be “ switcheda ( first ) 3D printer configured as described above , and to ” a first construction job that has already started .a driverless transport system for automatically feeding the 20 According to various embodiments , the following may3D printer with construction boxes . apply in the generative manufacturing process :The driverless transport system may , for example , com the first construction space may be arranged above a firstprise a rail system extending outside the 3D printer on the construction platform and the second construction spaceside of the first and the second construction box insertion may be arranged above a second construction platform ,opening , and along which a respective one of the first and 25 and / orsecond construction box is displaceable . The driverless the first construction space may be defined by a firsttransport system may , for example , comprise a transport construction box and the second construction space may betrolley which is movable along the rail system and which is defined by a second construction box , and / orable to transport at least one construction box . the first and the second construction space may respecThe driverless transport system , for example the rail 30 tively have two long and two short sides in a top view ,system , may for example connect the 3D printer or the 3D wherein the first and the second construction space are , forprinters with an optional construction box stock , in which example , arranged with two short sides adjacent to eachone or more construction boxes are held available , and / or an other ,optional microwave oven , for example for further solidify each construction space may be served by a separateing or completely hardening the components , and / or an 35 coating device , for which purpose the respective coatingoptional unpacking station , where a component may be device travels across its associated construction space forunpacked from the particulate material fill of unsolidified example perpendicularly to the long sides thereof , and / orconstruction material containing the component ( for both construction spaces may be served by a commonexample in an automated way ) and may optionally be printing head , for which purpose the common printing headstocked in a component stock . 40 travels across the first and the second construction space forAccording to various embodiments , the 3D printer example perpendicularly to the short sides thereof , forarrangement may , for example , comprise a first and a second example in a meandering pattern , for example in a U - shape ,3D printer , wherein the first and the second 3D printer are and / orarranged on opposite sides in such a way that the first and the the common printing head may be displaced in firstsecond construction box insertion opening of the first 3D 45 horizontal plane and both coating devices may be displacedprinter and the first and the second construction box inser in a second horizontal plane which is arranged at a verticaltion opening of the second 3D printer face each other and the distance from the first horizontal plane and is located , fordriverless transport system , for example the rail system example , underneath the same , and / orthereof , extends between the first and the second 3D printer the printing head may be displaced at a higher speed thanand / or is movable between these , so that the first and the 50 the respective coating device ( for example , the printer maysecond 3D printer can be charged with respective construc be displaced by the factor 3 or more faster than the coatingtion boxes by the common driverless transport system , for device ; for example , the printer may be displaced at approxiexample the rail system thereof . mately 1 m / s , whereas the coating device is displaced atAccording to various embodiments , a generative manu approximately 0.2 m / s ) , and / orfacturing process may be provided , where one or more 55 the first construction space and the second constructionthree - dimensional components , for example a casting mold space may be accommodated in a common housing , and / oror a foundry core are respectively built up in layers in a the first construction space and the second constructionrespective construction job simultaneously in a first con space may be are arranged in a common frame structure ,struction space and a second , adjacent construction space of and / ora common 3D printer configures as described above , for 60 the first coating device and the second coating device mayexample by forming layers of particulate construction mate be charged with construction material by a common coatingrial , for example containing sand particles , lying one upon device feeding unit .the other and selectively solidifying a partial region of the Additional features and advantages of the present invenrespective construction material layer in the respective con tion are illustrated by or are explained in detail in thestruction space . As described above for the 3D printer , the 65 enclosed drawings which are incorporated herein , as well astwo construction spaces may , for example , be arranged at a the following detailed description , which together serve tohorizontal distance from each other . explain certain principles of the present invention .5US 10,507,592 B213 14The invention will hereinafter be described in more detail tion box 20 , which by way of example are formed as mobileby means of various embodiments and with reference to the construction boxes , which can be removed from the 3DFigures . printer 100 following the respective construction job toFIG . 1 shows a schematic perspective view of a 3D printer unpack the components .according to a first embodiment of the invention ; As shown , the 3D printer 100 may , for example , beFIG . 2 shows a schematic perspective view of a 3D printer configured to receive the first construction box 10 and theaccording to a second embodiment of the invention , some components of the 3D printer having been omitted , such as second construction box 20 simultaneously in a respectively associated first and second construction box construction the housing and the coating device feeding unit ;FIG . 3 shows a schematic perspective view of the 3D 10 Struction box construction position , the respective construc position , respectively , separate from each other . In its conprinter of FIG . 2 , now a major part of the housing being tion box defines the first and the second construction space , shown as well , and , in addition , a part of the coating devicefeeding unit being illustrated ; respectively .FIGS . 4 to 14 show schematic perspective views of the 3D Consequently , using the 3D printer 100 , a first layer stackprinter of FIGS . 2 and 3 , by which manufacturing of a 15 may be built in the first construction box 10 and , simultacomponent using the 3D printer is to be illustrated ; neously , a second layer stack may be built in the secondFIGS . 15 and 16 show a 3D printer arrangement accord construction box 20 , each layer stack containing one or moreing to an embodiment of the invention ; components which are embedded into an unsolidified parFIG . 17 shows a possible configuration of a coating ticulate material ( at least in sections ) .device arrangement for use in a 3D printer according to the 20 As shown , the first construction box 10 and / or the secondinvention ; and construction box 20 may , for example , comprise a peripheralFIG . 18 shows a cross - sectional view through a coating wall structure , 12 and 22 , respectively , extending in adevice for use in the coating device arrangement according vertical direction , which delimits a respective constructionto FIG . 17 . box interior space . Here , by way of example , the respectiveIn the following detailed description , reference is made to 25 vertical peripheral wall structure has a rectangular shapethe enclosed Figures which are incorporated therein and in when viewed from above , with two long and two short sides .which specific embodiments are shown by way of illustra As shown , a first or second construction platform may, for tion , according to which the invention can be performed . In example , be received in the respective construction boxthis respect , the terms “ up ” , ” down ” , “ front ” , “ rear ” , etc. are interior space , extending in a horizontal direction . In this used with reference to the orientation in the described 30 respect, the construction platform 24 of the second construc Figures . As components of embodiments may be positioned tion box 20 is shown in FIG . 1 , whereas the construction in a number of different orientations , the terminology indicating the different directions serves for illustration and shall platform of the first construction box 10 is moved downnot be restrictive in any way . It shall be understood that other ward .embodiments may be used and structural or logical changes 35 In this respect , a first and a second construction space B1may be made without deviating from the scope of protection and B2 , respectively , is defined by the respective construcof the present invention . It goes without saying that the tion box interior space over the respective constructionfeatures of the various exemplary embodiments described platform , which is open in an upward direction , and in whichherein may be combined unless specified otherwise . Thus , at least one component can be built up by means of the 3Dthe following detailed description should not be understood 40 printer , when the construction box is in its respectivelyin a restrictive sense and the scope of protection of the associated construction box construction position .invention shall be defined by the attached claims . The first construction platform and / or the second conIn this description , terms such as “ connected ” , “ attached ” struction platform 24 may , for example , be height - adjustor “ coupled ” may be used to describe both a direct and able , so that the respective construction platform may beindirect connection , a direct or indirect attachment and a 45 lowered layerwise for building a component . Thus , thedirect or indirect coupling . construction space B1 and B2 , respectively , can be graduallyIn the Figures , identical or similar members are provided increased in the course of the respective construction job .with identical reference numbers where appropriate . As shown in FIG . 1 , the first construction space B1 and / orFIG . 1 shows a schematic perspective view of a 3D printer the second construction space B2 may , for example , have100 according to a first embodiment of the invention . 50 two long sides and two short sides in a top view . TheThe 3D printer 100 shown is configured to build up a respective short side may , for example , have a dimension ofthree - dimensional component , for example a casting mold less than or equal to 1.8 m , which allows an ergonomicor a foundry core in layers by forming layers of particulate unpacking of the components by running / walking along theconstruction material , for example containing sand particles , two long sides of the respective construction box 10 and 12 ,lying one upon another and selectively solidifying a subarea 55 respectively .of the respective construction material layer . For this pur As further shown in FIG . 1 , the first construction space B1pose , the 3D printer may , for example , apply / execute a and the second construction space B2 may , for example , beselective treatment agent printing method . adjacent to each other along a respective short side , forThe 3D printer 100 is configured to build one or more first example substantially along the entire respective short side .three - dimensional components in a first construction space 60 In other words , the two construction spaces B1 and B2 mayB1 arranged in the 3D printer and , simultaneously , one or be opposite to each other with two short sides , whereasmore second three - dimensional components in a second respectively two long sides are in extension to each other .construction space B2 arranged adjacent to the first con As shown in FIG . 1 , the 3D printer 100 may , for example ,struction space at a horizontal distance therefrom in the 3D comprise a coating device arrangement 30 which is movableprinter . 65 across the first construction space B1 and the second conAs shown in FIG . 1 , the 3D printer 100 may , for example , struction space B2 in a first horizontal direction H1 , tocomprise a first construction box 10 and a second construc supply the first and the second construction space withUS 10,507,592 B215 16construction material in the form of a respectively uniform formed by the first construction box 10 , and the secondconstruction material layer of the construction material to be construction space B2 , here exemplarily formed by thesolidified . second construction box 20 , are arranged .As shown , the first horizontal direction H1 may , for As further shown by FIG . 1 , the 3D printer 100 may , forexample , be perpendicular to the long sides and / or parallel 5 example , comprise a common housing 80 , in which both theto the short sides in this regard . first construction space B1 , here exemplarily formed by theThe coating device arrangement 30 may , for example , first construction box 10 , and the second construction spacecomprise a first coating device 32 assigned to the first B2 , here exemplarily formed by the second construction boxconstruction space B1 , and a second coating device 34 20 , are accommodated . As shown , the common housingseparate therefrom , which is assigned to the second con- 10 may , for example , comprise a continuous housing portion orstruction space B2 . wall portion which covers both the first construction spaceThe first coating device 32 and the second coating device and the second construction space at least in part .34 may , for example , be firmly connected , so that they can As further shown by FIG . 1 , the 3D printer 100 may , forbe moved together across the first construction space and the example , comprise a first construction box insertion openingsecond construction space , respectively . 15 82 and a second construction box insertion opening 84An example of such a coating device arrangement 30 is which may , for example , be provided on a common side ofdescribed below with reference to FIG . 17 , and an example the 3D printer 100 , and by means of which the first conof a coating device 32 , 34 is described below with reference struction box 10 and the second construction box 20 , respecto FIG . 18 . tively , can be introduced into their respective constructionAs shown in FIG . 1 , the 3D printer 100 may , for example , 20 box construction position within the 3D printer .comprise a common printing device 50 which is movable As further shown by FIG . 1 , the 3D printer 100 may , foracross the first construction space B1 and the second con example , comprise a common control cabinet 76 and astruction space B2 in a second horizontal direction H2 , to common operating station 78 , for example including aselectively solidify a subarea of a previously applied con common control panel .struction material layer of the respective construction space 25 FIGS . 2 and 3 respectively show a schematic perspectiveby a controlled output of a flowable treatment agent , for view of a 3D printer according to a second embodiment ofexample a binding agent . the invention , some components of the 3D printer havingAs shown , the second horizontal direction may , for been omitted in FIG . 2 , such as the housing and the coatingexample , be perpendicular to the first horizontal direction device feeding unit . In addition , a part of the 3D printer isH1 and / or perpendicular to the short construction space 30 cut free on the front left - hand side in FIG . 3 , in order to makesides . visible for example the first construction platform .The common printing device 50 may , for example com A description of features similar or identical to those ofprise a common print head 52 comprising one or more the 3D printer of the first embodiment is hereinafter partiallyprinting nozzles . The print head 52 may supply both the first omitted .construction space B1 and the second construction space B2 35 The 3D printer 100 according to the second embodimentwith the treatment agent . In other words , the first construc is configured to build up a three - dimensional component intion space B1 and the second construction space B2 share layers by forming layers of particulate construction materialthe print head 52 and its one or more printing nozzles , lying one upon the other and by selectively solidifying arespectively . partial area of the respective construction material layer , forAs shown , the printing device 50 may , for example , 40 example by means of a selective treatment agent printingcomprise a guiding structure 54 extending in a longitudinal method .direction of the respective construction space substantially The 3D printer 100 is further configured to build up oneentirely along the two construction spaces B1 and B2 ( here , or more first three - dimensional components in a first confor example , vertically above the construction spaces ) , and struction space B1 arranged in the 3D printer , and simultaalong which the print head 52 is displaceable in the second 45 neously one or more second three - dimensional componentshorizontal direction H2 . in a second construction space B2 arranged adjacent to theThe print head 52 may have a treatment agent output first construction space at a horizontal distance thereto in theregion formed by the printing nozzles , the elongated exten 3D printer .sion of which corresponds , for example , to a portion , for As in the first embodiment , also the 3D printer 100example , as shown , substantially the half , of the length / 50 according to the second embodiment may , for example ,dimension of a respective short construction space side . As comprise a first construction box 10 and a second construcshown , the printing device 50 may , for example , comprise a tion box 20 , which are for example again configured assecond guiding structure 56 in this regard , which is movable mobile construction boxes , which may be removed from thealong the first guiding structure 54 together with the print 3D printer 100 upon completion of the respective construchead , and along which the print head 52 is movable in the 55 tion job to unpack the components . In this respect , the 3Dfirst horizontal direction H1 , so that the print head 52 is printer 100 is configured to receive the first construction boxmovable altogether in a meandering pattern , for example in 10 and the second construction box 20 simultaneously in aa U shape , over / across the two construction spaces B1 and respectively associated first and second construction boxB2 . construction position , respectively , separate from each other .In a vertical direction , the print head 52 may , for example , 60 As shown in FIG . 2 , the first construction box 10 and / or thebe arranged at a distance from the first coating device 32 and second construction box 20 may , for example , comprise athe second coating device 34 , and may consequently be peripheral wall structure 12 and 22 , respectively , extendingdisplaceable horizontally in a separate horizontal plane , for in a vertical direction , delimiting a respective constructionexample above the coating devices . box interior space . Here , the respective vertical circumferAs further illustrated by FIG . 1 , the 3D printer 100 may , 65 ential wall structure has , for example , a rectangular shapefor example , comprise a common frame structure 70 in when viewed from above . As shown in FIG . 3 , a firstwhich both the first construction space B1 , here exemplarily construction platform 14 and a second construction platformB2 may ,US 10,507,592 B217 1824 , respectively , extending in a horizontal direction , may , for the second horizontal direction may , for example , be perexample , be received in the respective construction box pendicular to the first horizontal direction H1 . Even if aninterior space . The first construction platform 12 and / or the orientation of a first and a second horizontal directionsecond construction platform 24 may , for example , be perpendicular to each other has proved its worth in practice ,height - adjustable , so that the respective construction plat- 5 it is generally possible to , for example , both coat and printform may , for example , be lowered layerwise for building a in the same horizontal direction , for example respectively incomponent . In this connection , reference number 18 desig a longitudinal direction of the two construction spaces , i.e.nates a stationary , plant - fixed lift drive for the first construc along the direction Hz .tion box 10. However , a lift drive integrated in the construc The common printing device 50 may , for example , comtion box may be used as well . In this respect , a first and a 10 prise a common print head 52 comprising one or moresecond construction space B1 and B2 , respectively , is printing nozzles , and / or a guiding structure 54 ( for exampledefined by the respective construction box interior space a linear guiding structure ) , along which the print head 52above the respective construction platform , which is open in may be moved . The guiding structure 54 may , for example ,an upward direction , in which at least one component may extend in a longitudinal direction of the respective construcbe built up by means of the 3D printer , when the construc- 15 tion space substantially entirely along both constructiontion box is in its associated construction box construction spaces B1 and B2 , so that the print head is displaceable inposition . Cf. FIG . 4 . the second horizontal direction H2 .As shown , the first construction space B1 and / or the As shown in FIG . 2 , the 3D printer 100 may , for example ,second construction space for example , have two comprise a carrier structure 58 ( for example an elongate ,long sides and two short sides , when viewed from above . As 20 continuous carrier structure ) to which the first guidingin the first embodiment , the respective short side may , for structure 54 is fixed and which itself is fixed to the frameexample , have a dimension of less than or equal to 1.8 m . As structure 70 of the 3D printer .in the first embodiment , the two construction spaces may be The print head 52 may have a treatment agent outputarranged adjacent to each other along two short sides . region formed by the printing nozzles , the elongate extenIn addition , a respective optional construction box feeding 25 sion of which corresponds , for example , to a portion , fordevice 16 and 26 is shown in FIGS . 2 and 3 , by means of example as shown substantially the half , of the length /which the first construction box 10 and the second construc dimension of a respective short construction space side . Astion box 20 , respectively , is movable into its construction shown , the printing device 50 may , for example , comprise abox construction position within the 3D printer . As shown , second guiding structure 56 in this regard , which is movablethe respective construction box feeding device may , for 30 along the first guiding structure 54 together with the printexample , be configured as a roller conveyor . head and along which the print head 52 is movable in theAs shown in FIGS . 2 and 3 , the 3D printer 100 may , for first horizontal direction H1 , so that the print head 52 isexample , comprise a coating device arrangement 30 which movable altogether in a meandering pattern , for example inis movable across the first construction space B1 and the a U shape across the two construction spaces B1 and B2 .second construction space B2 in a first horizontal direction 35 As shown in FIG . 3 , the 3D printer 100 may for example ,H1 , to supply the first and the second construction space comprise an integrated , common coating device feeding unitwith construction material in the form of a respectively 60. As shown , the coating device feeding unit 60 is , foruniform construction material layer of the construction example , arranged in a vertical direction above the first andmaterial to be solidified , for example parallel to each other . the second coating device 32 , 34. Both the first and theAs shown , the first horizontal direction H1 may , for 40 second coating device 32 , 34 can be supplied with construcexample , be perpendicular to the long sides and / or parallel tion material using the coating device feeding unit 60. Forto the short sides in this respect , and the coating device example , the coating device feeding unit 60 may comprisearrangement 30 may for example , comprise a first coating a common mixing unit ( not shown ) , for example comprisingdevice 32 assigned to the first construction space B1 and a a common mixing container having an agitator , whereinseparate second coating device 34 assigned to the second 45 construction material prepared in the mixing container canconstruction space B2 . An example of such a coating device be fed to the first and the second coating device 32 , 34 byarrangement 30 is described below with reference to FIG . a branched feeding structure , if they are moved into a17 , and an example of a coating device 32 , 34 is described respective filling position . For this purpose , the respectivebelow with reference to FIG . 18 . coating device may , for example , comprise a constructionAs shown in FIG . 2 , the 3D printer may , for example , 50 material feed hopper which , for example , is funnel - shaped incomprise a linear guiding structure 33 , at which a longitu cross - section . For the first coating device 32 , FIG . 2 showsdinal end ( here the left one ) of the first coating device 32 is such a construction material feed hopper on the right - handguided to be linearly displaceable . Another linear guiding side of the coating device , the coating device being otherstructure may , for example , be provided at the longitudinal wise closed in an upward direction . The second coatingend ( here the right one ) of the second coating device 34. Yet 55 device 34 may , for example , be provided with an analogousanother linear guiding structure may , for example , be pro construction material feed hopper , for example at its longivided between the two coating devices 32 , 34. The respec tudinal end facing the first coating device 32. The visibletive linear guiding structure may , for example , be supported part of the coating device feeding unit 60 shown in FIG . 3on / by the common frame structure 70 . comprises a first and a second storing container , from whichAs shown in FIGS . 2 and 3 , the 3D printer 100 may , for 60 the mixing container may be supplied with a respectiveexample , comprise a common printing device 50 which is construction material component ( for example a particulatemovable across the first construction space B1 and the material ) . Moreover , one or more liquid supply lines maysecond construction space B2 in a second horizontal direc lead to the mixing container .tion H2 ( for example one after the other ) , to selectively FIGS . 4 to 14 show schematic perspective views of the 3Dsolidify a partial area of a previously applied construction 65 printer 100 of FIGS . 2 and 3 , by means of which thematerial layer of the respective construction space by a manufacturing process of a component using the 3D printercontrolled output of a flowable treatment agent . As shown , 100 will hereinafter be described according to an exemplaryUS 10,507,592 B219 20embodiment of the invention . In order to allow a better second construction platform 24 using the second coatingillustration of the process , a part of the 3D printer was cut device 34. In this respect , the thickness of the layer isfree in the Figures ( according to the selected view on the represented to be increased in size relative to the otherfront left ) . components . The print head 52 is still located at the front In this respect , the 3D printer 100 performs a generative 5 right .manufacturing process , where one or more three - dimen sional components, for example a casting mold or a foundry As shown in FIG . 6 , the print head 52 may then be moved core , are respectively built up in layers in a respective in the horizontal direction H2 to the left front side , to construction job simultaneously in a first construction space selectively supply or rather print a front partial area (h ere ,B1 and a second construction space B2 of a common 3D 10 material layer and a front partial area ( here , for example , the for example , the front half ) of the second constructionprinter 100 , arranged adjacent to the first construction spaceand with a horizontal distance , by forming layers of par front half ) of the first construction material layer withticulate construction material , for example containing sand treatment agent one after the other . The coating deviceparticles , lying one upon the other and selectively solidify arrangement 30 remains in its position shown in FIG . 5 .ing a partial region of the respective construction material 15 As shown in FIG . 7 , the print head 52 may then be movedlayer in the respective construction space . in the horizontal direction H , to the rear left , to align theAs shown in FIG . 4 , the following may apply in the print head 52 for a selective printing of the rear partial areagenerative manufacturing process : of the respective construction material layer . The coatingthe first construction space B1 may be arranged above a device arrangement 30 remains in its position shown infirst construction platform 14 and the second construction 20 FIGS . 5 and 6 .space B2 may be arranged above a second construction As shown in FIG . 8 , the print head 52 may then beplatform 24 , and / or displaced in the horizontal direction H , to the rear right , tothe first construction space B1 may be defined by a first selectively supply or rather print the rear partial area ( here ,construction box 10 and the second construction space B2 for example , the rear half ) of the first construction materialmay be defined by a second construction box 20 , and / or 25 layer and a rear partial area ( here , for example , the rear half )the first and the second construction space B1 , B2 may of the second construction material layer with treatmentrespectively have two long and two short sides in a top view , agent one after the other . The coating device arrangement 30each construction space may be served by a separate still remains in its position shown in FIGS . 5 to 7 .coating device 32 , 34 ( see also FIG . 5 ) , for which purpose Consequently , a construction material layer is arrangedthe respective coating device travels across its associated 30 over the entire surface in each construction space , which isconstruction space for example perpendicularly to the long selectively treated with treatment agent , the treatment agentsides thereof , and / or contributing to an immediate and / or subsequent ) solidifiboth construction spaces may be served by a common cation of the particulate material in the selectively printedprinting head 52 , for which purpose the common printinghead travels across the first and the second construction 35 As shown in FIG . 9 , the two construction platforms 14space for example perpendicularly to the short sides thereof , and 24 may subsequently be lowered by another layerfor example in a meandering pattern , for example in a thickness . The coating device arrangement 30 still remainsU - shape ( this is described in detail below ) , and / or in the front position . The print head 52 has been moved fromthe first construction space B1 and the second construc the rear right to the right front .tion space B2 may be accommodated in a common housing 40 As shown in FIG . 10 , the coating device arrangement 30and / or may then be moved to the rear in the horizontal direction H1 ,the first construction space B1 and the second construc to put down another first construction material layer on thetion space B2 may be are arranged in a common frame first construction platform 14 using the first coating devicestructure 70 , and / or 32 and to put down another second construction materialthe first coating device 32 and the second coating device 45 layer on the second construction platform 24 using the34 may be charged with construction material by a common second coating device 34. Thus , the coating device arrangecoating device feeding unit 60 . ment 30 is , examplarily , configured as a bidirectional coatThe common print head 52 may , for example , be dis ing device arrangement . The print head 52 is still arrangedplaced in a first horizontal plane , whereas the two coating at the front right .devices 32 , 34 are displaced in a second horizontal plane 50 As shown in FIG . 11 , the print head 52 may then bewhich is arranged at a vertical distance from the first moved to the front left in the horizontal direction H2 , tohorizontal plane and is , for example , located underneath the selectively supply or rather print a front partial area ( here ,for example , the front half ) of the another second construcFor example , the print head 52 may be displaced at a tion material layer and a front partial area ( here , for example ,greater speed than the respective coating device 32 , 34 . 55 the front half ) of the another first construction material layerAs shown in FIG . 4 , in the generative manufacturing with treatment agent one after the other . The coating deviceprocess , the two construction platforms 14 and 24 may be arrangement 30 remains in its rear position .lowered by one layer thickness from the position shown in As shown in FIG . 12 , the print head 52 may than beFIG . 3 , when the two construction boxes 10 , 20 are in their moved in the horizontal direction H , to the rear left , to alignrelated construction position . The print head 52 is arranged 60 the print head 52 for a selective printing of the rear partialon the right front side in FIG . 4 , and the coating device area of the respective another construction material layer .arrangement 30 is arranged at the rear . The coating device arrangement 30 remains in its rearAs shown in FIG . 5 , the coating device arrangement 30 position . Reference number 59 in FIG . 12 indicates anmay then be displaced forward in the horizontal direction optional print head cleaning station in which the print headH? , to put down a first construction material layer on the first 65 52 may be cleaned prior to a construction job and / orconstruction platform 14 using the first coating device 32 , following a construction job and / or during a construction joband to put down a second construction material layer on the ( for example during a coating device journey ) .area .80 ,same .15US 10,507,592 B221 22As shown in FIG . 13 , the print head 52 may then be As further shown in FIGS . 15 and 16 , if the 3D printermoved in the horizontal direction H , to the rear right , to arrangement 200 comprises a first 3D printer 100 and aselectively supply or rather print the rear partial area ( here , second 3D printer 100 ' , the first and the second 3D printerfor example , the rear half ) of the another first construction 100 , 100 ' may be arranged on opposite sides in such a waymaterial layer and a rear partial area ( here , for example , the 5 that the first and the second construction box insertionrear half ) of the another second construction material layer opening 82 , 84 of the first 3D printer 100 and the first andwith treatment agent one after the other . The coating device the second construction box insertion opening 82 ' , 84 ' of thearrangement 30 remains in its rear position . second 3D printer 100 ' face each other and the driverlessAs shown in FIG . 14 , the above - mentioned steps may be transport system 90 extends between the first and the secondrepeated to build up a layer stack of particulate material in 10 3D printer , so that the first and the second 3D printer can bethe respective construction space , which respectively con charged with respective construction boxes by the driverlesstains at least one component of solidified particulate material transport system . In this case , the driverless transport system( not shown ) . 90 may be referred to as a common driverless transportFIGS . 15 and 16 show a 3D printer arrangement 200 system , as it is used by both 3D printers 100 , 100 ' .according to an embodiment of the invention . FIG . 17 shows a possible configuration of a coatingAs shown in FIGS . 15 and 16 , the 3D printing arrange device arrangement 30 for use in a 3D printer according toment 200 may comprise one or more ( here by way of the invention . The coating device arrangement 30 may , forexample two ) 3D printers according to the invention , for example , be used in the 3D printer 100 according to the firstexample one or more 3D printers 100 according to the first embodiment and / or in the 3D printer 100 according to theembodiment and / or one or more 3D printers 100 according 20 second embodiment .to the second embodiment . As shown in FIG . 17 , the coating device arrangement 30Moreover , the 3D printer arrangement 200 may for comprises a first coating device 32 and a second coatingexample comprise a driverless transport system 90 for device 34 separate therefrom . The first coating device 32automatically charging the 3D printer 100 with construction may be assigned to a first construction space ( not shown ) ,boxes . The driverless transport system 90 may , for example , 25 for example may span the longitudinal extension thereof ,comprise a rail system 94 extending outside the 3D printer and the second coating device 34 may be assigned to a100 on the side of the first and the second construction box second construction space ( not shown ) , for example mayinsertion opening 82 , 84 , and along which a respective one span the longitudinal extension thereof .of the first and the second construction box is displaceable . The coating device arrangement 30 may , for example beThe driverless transport system 90 may , for example , further 30 arranged in a 3D printer in a way to be displaceable acrosscomprise a transport trolley which is movable along the rail the first and the second construction space in a first horisystem 94 and which is able to transport at least one zontal direction , to supply the first and the second construcconstruction box . For example , a first construction box may tion space with the construction material to be solidified inbe transported to the front of the first construction box the form of a respectively uniform construction materialinsertion opening 82 by means of the transport system 90 35 layer . For this purpose , the first coating device 32 and theand may then be moved to its construction box construction second coating device 34 may be guided in parallel , to beposition within the 3D printer by means of the first roller displaceable across their associated construction area paralconveyor 16 ( or an alternative construction box feeding lel to each other in the first horizontal direction . It isdevice ) , in which position a first construction space is basically possible to move the first coating device 32 and thedefined by the first construction box . Analogously , a second 40 second coating device 34 independent of each other or toconstruction box may be transported to the front of the move them across the construction field together . The lattersecond construction box insertion opening 84 by means of alternative is illustrated in FIG . 17 and will be described inthe transport system 90 , and may then be displaced into its detail below .construction box construction position within the 3D printer The first and the second coating device 32 , 34 are eachby means of the second roller conveyor 26 ( or an alternative 45 configured as so - called container coating devices , i.e. theyconstruction box feeding device ) . In this respect , FIG . 16 comprise a respective container which is displaceable acrossshows a state in which ( only ) the first construction box is an associated construction space and defines an inner cavitymoved into its construction position . The described con for receiving particulate construction material , which leadsstruction box charging process for the first and the second to an opening for outputting the particulate constructionconstruction box may , for example , be performed in a fully 50 material to the construction field or the construction space .automated manner . As shown , the first and the second coating device 32 , 34As shown in FIGS . 15 and 16 , one or more optional may for example be formed to be elongate . In other words ,components 110 , 120 , 130 may be provided along the the first and the second coating device 32 , 34 may betransport system , which are connected to the 3D printer 100 configured as so - called slot coating devices . The length ofby the driverless transport system . 55 the ( discharge ) slot of the respective coating device beThe optional components may comprise an optional con greater than or equal to the related construction space lengthstruction box stock 110 in which one or more ( here by way in this regard .of example two ) construction boxes are kept , and / or an As shown , the first coating device 32 and the secondoptional microwave oven 120 into which a construction box coating device 34 may , for example , be firmly connected tomay be moved , for example to further solidify the manu- 60 each other , for example by a common connection plate 36 ,factured components received therein , and / or an optional such that they are displaceable across the first constructionunpacking station 130 where a component may be unpacked space and the second construction space , respectively ,from the particulate material fill of unsolidified construction together .material containing the component ( for example in an auto In this respect , the common connection plate 36 may , formated manner ) . The unpacked components may , for 65 example , be fixed to a linear guiding structure ( not shown ) ,example , be stocked in an optional component stock 140 , for for example may be supported thereby , for example on aexample in the form of a shelf . slide of the linear guiding structure . The linear guidingmayUS 10,507,592 B223 24structure itself may , for example , be fixed to a frame FIG . 17 , the switched - off coating device still travels alongstructure ( not shown ) . The respective coating device may , with the active coating device , the construction job of whichfor example , be fixed to another linear guiding structure at has not been finished yet , but a discharge of particulateits free longitudinal end . For example , the first coating material from the inactive coating device is avoided bydevice 32 may be fixed with the plate 37 to a second linear 5 means of the closing device .guiding structure . The second coating device 34 may be As further shown in FIG . 18 , one or more ( here by wayfixed to a third linear guiding structure in the same way . of example two ) stroking members 44 may be attached to theFIG . 18 shows a cross - sectional view through a coating coating device 32 , 34 , which are configured to strokedevice for use in the coating device arrangement 30 of FIG . particulate construction material discharged from the open17 and for use in a 3D printer according to the invention , 10 ing , to thereby level and / or compress the discharged parrespectively , for example in the 3D printer 100 according to ticulate material . Attaching two stroking members 44 allowsthe first embodiment and / or in the 3D printer 100 according to operate the coating device as a bidirectional coatingto the second embodiment . device which is able to apply uniform layers of constructionThe coating device shown may be used as the first and / or material in both directions ( journey and return journey ) . Thethe second coating device of a coating device arrangement , 15 respective stroking member 44 may , for example , be madewhich is the reason why reference numbers 32 and 34 have of metal , for example steel , and / or may have an elongatebeen indicated in FIG . 18 . shape , and / or may be configured as a blade , and / or mayAs shown , the coating device 32 , 34 may comprise a comprise a substantially planar , lower surface , by means ofcontainer 38 which defines an inner cavity for receiving which the discharged particulate material may be levelledparticulate construction material , which leads to an opening 20 and / or compressed .for outputting the particulate construction material . The The previous description of specific exemplary embodicontainer 38 may , for example , be connected to a carrier ments has been presented for the purpose of illustration andstructure 48 or may be fixed thereto . description . It is not intended to be exhaustive or to limit theA so - called supply container 40 may , for example , be invention to the exact forms disclosed , and it is to beprovided above the container 38 , which supplies the ( lower ) 25 understood that various modifications and variations arecontainer 38 with particulate construction material . A dis possible in the light of the teaching disclosed herein . Thetribution device 42 , here by way of example in the shape of scope of protection is defined by the attached claims andan auger / screw , may be provided in the supply container 40 , their equivalents .which distributes the particulate construction material fed to The invention claimed is :the supply container 40 in the supply container 40. The 30 1. 3D printer ( 100 ) ,supply container itself may , for example , be supplied with which is configured to build up a three - dimensionalconstruction material by a coating device feeding device , for component in layers by forming layers of particulateexample by the coating device feeding device 60 of FIG . 4 . construction material lying one upon the other and byFor this purpose , the coating device may , for example , be selectively solidifying a partial region of the respectivemoved into a so - called coating device filling position within 35 construction material layer , anda 3D printer , in which position it is supplied with construc which is configured to build up one or more first threetion material by the coating device feeding device . dimensional components in a first construction spaceFor example , a closing device 46 may respectively be ( B1 ) which is arranged in the 3D printer , and simultaattached to the coating device 32 , 34 , which is configured to neously one or more second three - dimensional comselectively close the opening for outputting the particulate 40 ponents in a second construction space ( B2 ) which isconstruction material . A closing device of this type may , for arranged adjacent to the first construction space at aexample , comprise one or more ( here by way of example horizontal distance therefrom in the 3D printer ,two ) elongate hollow bodies with a respective expansion having a coating device arrangement ( 30 ) which is disportion , where the elongate hollow body may be expanded placeable across the first and the second constructionby supplying a pressure fluid into the cavity of the hollow 45 space ( B1 , B2 ) in a first horizontal direction ( H ) , tobody , the expansion of the hollow body at the expansion supply the first and the second construction space withportion contributing to closing the opening . The expansion construction material in the form of a respectivelyportion of the respective hollow body is by way of example uniform construction material layer of the constructioncurved inwards in FIG . 18 , the opened state of the closing material to be solidified , anddevice being shown in FIG . 18 , in which the opening of the 50 having a common printing device ( 50 ) which is displacecontainer is exposed . The two expansion portions deform able across the first and the second construction spaceoutward and toward each other by the supply of a pressure ( B1 , B2 ) in a second horizontal direction ( Hz ) , tofluid into the respective hollow body , to thereby cover / close selectively solidify a partial region of a previouslythe opening of the container . Alternatively , the closing applied construction material layer of the respectivedevice 46 may , for example , be configured as a slider or gate 55 construction space by a controlled output of a flowablevalve device . treatment agent ,The opening of a respective coating device may , for wherein the common printing device ( 50 ) comprises aexample , be selectively closed by means of the closing common printing head ( 52 ) having one or more printdevice ( for example in a controlled way , i.e. by a control ing nozzles , which is configured to serve both the firstunit ) , in order to avoid a discharge of particulate material 60 construction space ( B1 ) and the second constructionduring an acceleration portion / acceleration ramp in front of space ( B2 ) , andthe construction area and / or a deceleration portion behind wherein the second horizontal direction ( H2 ) is perpenthe construction area when the coating device travels across dicular to the first horizontal direction ( Hi ) .the associated construction area , and / or to selectively 2. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 1 ,“ switch off ” or close one of the coating devices upon 65 wherein the first construction space ( B1 ) and / or the seccompletion of the construction job assigned thereto . In the ond construction space ( B2 ) have two long sides andembodiment of the coating device arrangement 30 shown in two short sides in top view , and / or51015US 10,507,592 B225 26wherein the first horizontal direction ( H ) is perpendicular ( B1 ) and a second coating device ( 34 ) separate therefrom ,to the long sides and / or parallel to the short sides , which is assigned to the second construction space ( B2 ) .and / or 11. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 10 , whereinwherein the second horizontal direction ( H2 ) is perpen the first coating device ( 32 ) and / or the second coatingdicular to the short sides and / or parallel to the long device ( 34 ) respectively comprise a container ( 38 )sides . which defines an inner cavity for receiving particulate3. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 1 , construction material , which leads to an opening forhaving a first construction platform ( 14 ) and a second outputting the particulate construction material ,construction platform ( 24 ) , wherein a closing device ( 46 ) is respectively attachedwherein the 3D printer ( 100 ) is configured to receive the to the first coating device ( 32 ) and / or the secondfirst construction platform ( 14 ) and the second con coating device (3 4 ), which is configured to selectively struction platform (2 4 ) simultaneously in a respectively close the opening for outputting the particulate conassociated first and second construction platform con struction material , and / or wherein a stroking memberstruction position , respectively , which are separate ( 44 ) is respectively attached to the first coating device from each other, in which the respective construction ( 32 ) and /o r the second coating device (3 4 ) , which is platform is arranged within the 3D printer and in which configured to stroke particulate construction material outputted from the opening , to thereby level and / orthe first construction space is arranged above the first compress the output particulate material , and / orconstruction platform and the second construction the first coating device ( 32 ) and the second coating devicespace is arranged above the second construction plat- 20 ( 34 ) are connected to each other in a fixed way , to beform . displaceable together across the first construction space4. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 1 , ( B1 ) and the second construction space ( B2 ) , respechaving a first construction box ( 10 ) and a second con tively .struction box ( 20 ) , 12. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 1 , wherein thewherein the 3D printer ( 100 ) is configured to receive the 25 common printing device ( 50 ) comprises a common printingfirst construction box ( 10 ) and the second construction head ( 52 ) having one or more printing nozzles , whichbox ( 20 ) simultaneously in a respectively associated has a treatment agent output area formed by the printingfirst and second construction box construction position , nozzles , a dimension of which corresponds to all or arespectively , which are separate from each other , in portion of a respective short side , and / orwhich the respective construction box is arranged 30 is arranged in a vertical direction at a distance from thewithin the 3D printer for building up the respectively at coating device arrangement ( 30 ) and is displaceableleast one component by means of the 3D printer in the horizontally in a separate horizontal plane .first and the second construction space , respectively , 13. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim further havingdefined by the first and the second construction box , a common coating device feeding unit ( 60 ) integrated in theso that respectively one or more components may be built 35 3D printer ,up in layers simultaneously in the first construction box which is arranged in a vertical direction above the first and( 10 ) and the second construction box ( 20 ) using the 3D the second coating device ( 32 , 34 ) , andprinter ( 100 ) by which both the first and the second coating device ( 32 ,5. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 4 , wherein the first 34 ) can be supplied with construction material by aconstruction box ( 10 ) and / or the second construction box 40 feeding structure split in two or more parts and( 20 ) comprise a peripheral wall structure ( 12 , 22 ) extending the common coating device feeding unit ( 60 ) comprises ain a vertical direction , which delimits a respective construc common mixing unit wherein the construction materialtion box interior space , wherein a first and a second con prepared in the mixing container can be fed to the firststruction platform ( 14 , 24 ) , respectively , extending in a and the second coating device ( 32 , 34 ) by the feedinghorizontal direction , are received in the respective construc- 45 structure .tion box interior space . 14. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 1 , having6. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 3 , wherein the first a common frame structure ( 70 ) in which both the firstconstruction platform ( 14 ) and / or the second construction construction space ( B1 ) and the second constructionplatform ( 24 ) are height - adjustable , so that the respective space ( B2 ) are arranged , and / orconstruction platform may be lowered gradually for building 50 a common housing ( 80 ) in which both the first construcup a component . tion space ( B1 ) and the second construction space ( B2 )7. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 2 , wherein each are arranged .short side of the first construction space ( B1 ) and / or of the 15. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 1 , wherein the 3Dsecond construction space ( B2 ) has a dimension of less than printer comprises a first and a second construction boxor equal to 2 m . 55 insertion opening ( 82 , 83 ) which are provided on a common8. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 2 , wherein the first side of the 3D printer .and the second construction space ( B1 , B2 ) are arranged 16. 3D printer ( 100 ) ,adjacent to each other along a respective short side . which is configured to build up a three - dimensional9. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 3 , wherein the first component in layers by forming layers of particulateand / or the second construction platform ( 14 , 24 ) or con- 60 construction material lying one upon the other and bystruction box ( 10 , 20 ) are displaceable between their respec selectively solidifying a partial region of the respectivetive construction position and an additional position in construction material layer , andwhich the respective construction platform or construction which is configured to build up one or more first threebox is arranged outside the 3D printer . dimensional components in a first construction space10. 3D printer ( 100 ) according to claim 1 , wherein the 65 ( B1 ) which is arranged in the 3D printer , and simultacoating device arrangement ( 30 ) comprises a first coating neously one or more second three - dimensional comdevice ( 32 ) which is assigned to the first construction space ponents in a second construction space ( B2 ) which isUS 10,507,592 B227 28arranged adjacent to the first construction space at a selectively solidifying a partial region of the respectivehorizontal distance therefrom in the 3D printer , construction material layer , andhaving a coating device arrangement ( 30 ) which is dis which is configured to build up one or more first threeplaceable across the first and the second construction dimensional components in a first construction spacespace ( B1 , B2 ) in a first horizontal direction ( H? ) , to 5 ( B1 ) which is arranged in the 3D printer , and simultasupply the first and the second construction space with neously one or more second three - dimensional com construction material in the form of a respectively ponents in a second construction space ( B2 ) which isuniform construction material layer of the construction arranged adjacent to the first construction space at a material to be solidified , wherein the coating device arrangement ( 30 ) comprises a first coating device ( 32 ) 10 horizontal distance therefrom in the 3D printer , which is assigned to the first construction space (B 1) having a bidirectional coating device arrangement ( 30 )and a second coating device ( 34 ) separate therefrom , which is displaceable across the first and the secondwhich is assigned to the second construction space construction space (B 1, B2) in a first horizontal direction ( H , ) , to supply the first and the second constructionhaving a common printing device ( 50 ) which is displace- 15 space with construction material in the form of aable across the first and the second construction space respectively uniform construction material layer of the( B1 , B2 ) in a second horizontal direction ( Hz ) , to construction material to be solidified , andselectively solidify a partial region of a previously having a bidirectional common printing device ( 50 ) whichapplied construction material layer of the respective is displaceable across the first and the second construcconstruction space by a controlled output of a flowable 20 tion space ( B1 , B2 ) in a second horizontal directiontreatment agent. ( H , ), to selectively solidify a partial region of a previ17. 3D printer ( 100 ) , ously applied construction material layer of the respecwhich is configured to build up a three - dimensional tive construction space by a controlled output of acomponent in layers by forming layers of particulate flowable treatment agent .construction material lying one upon the other and by( B2 ) , and*